Professor Michael McBride: Okay. So for 150 years organic chemistry courses have tended to acquire a daunting reputation. So you need help. I know you’re very able, but trust me, you need help. So where do you  the help? The PowerPoints are available on the Web. How many of you’ve already seen the PowerPoint for today, just so I have some idea? So about a quarter of you maybe. Okay, but anyhow, so your lecture notes are important, but you don’t have to worry about getting everything down because you can download it from the Web. And I do it on a Mac, but I try my best to make it compatible with PCs and even with the free PC Viewer for PowerPoint. So you should be able to see it. But I don’t see it on a PC. So if anything doesn’t come through, let me know so that I can fix it. Okay then, in-class discussion is very important, and if you’re really, really shy and can’t participate in discussion in class, then email me a question. Okay?There’s the course website, which is our substitute for a text. It also includes the PowerPoint, and there’s the link for it, and when go there you’ll see it develop. The current website is mostly last year’s course, so it’ll change a little bit as we go along, but fundamentally it’s the same. If you want to look ahead you’ll see pretty much what’s coming up. There’ll be assigned problems and questions, and also there are previous exams and answers keys. All these things are on the course website so you’ll get help there. But one thing that’s really special is the course Wiki. This is the third year we’ve done it and the second year in a really systematic way. So you get assigned to do, to cover a couple frames of the PowerPoint. So those are the ones you really need to take careful notes on, and write them up, and help other people too; that’s the nature of a Wiki, as you know. How many of you have participated in a Wiki? Well, by next week it will be all of you. Okay, but in order to get credit for it you have to get it by the night after the lecture. So for the lecture today you have to get it by late tomorrow night, 36 hours after the lecture. This is so other students can use it. Okay, in the spring there’ll probably be a textbook. I haven’t really decided yet. These things cost an arm and a leg. Maybe we can find one that’s used, an older edition. It doesn’t make any difference except to the publishers.Okay, also there’s personal help, like from me, and there’s — and you can find my phone number, email and so on, on the website. Also the two graduate student TAs who are assigned to the course, who are Filip Kolundzic — Filip, back there — and Nathan Schley, not Schlay, Schley. So these are graduate students in chemistry and they run these discussion sections. Typically you have a 50-minute discussion section. But the way we run it in this course is that on two different nights a week there are two-hour sessions. You can come to any part of it you want to. You can go to both of them, you can go to four hours a week if you want to, or you can go to none at all if you want to. So really, for the bookkeeping purposes of the department you have to sign up for a section. Sign up for any section you want to and then come to what’s useful for you. But also, the reason you pay the big bucks to come here, is not to hear me, it’s to interact with the other students. That’s a really big help. So, form study groups. And in fact you can get advice from previous people who’ve taken the course. That’s on the Web. Also there’s some of them, there’s a list of them on the Web who would be happy to talk to you if you need it.And we’re blessed with three alumni, seniors who took this course as freshmen, who act as what are called peer tutors, and they’ll run a session Sunday evening, from eight to ten p.m. is the current plan. We’ll announce the rooms for these things on the website and probably by email to you as well. So let me introduce Tina Ho and Drew Klein and Justin Kim. So they’ll be a big help to you too. So there’s plenty of personal help, so use it.These are the dates we’re going to have exams. There are ten lectures and then an exam; nine lectures, exam; nine lectures, exam. Actually, if you check, you’ll find that — and also you get 50 points for participation in the Wiki, and the total is 650 points, that’s what your exam is based on. Actually this doesn’t cover — it’s nine lectures that are covered on the exam, but the previous Wednesday part of the lecture is going to be a guest lecturer that’s going to be here just that day. So we’re putting the exam off and it’ll only cover the previous material; not that that’s a big deal. Okay, and the semester grade is biased; that is, it’s based on this, your total score here, out of 650 points. But if you’re near a cutoff and you were very good about turning in your problem sets and so on, then we boost you up. We don’t grade problem sets but it’s worthwhile to do them, and they might make a difference.So where are we going with this? What are the goals of our Freshman Organic Chemistry? In fact, if you click that in your PowerPoint you’ll get taken to that site, but it’s right on the website, you’ll see it anyhow. First is to learn the crucial facts and vocabulary of Organic Chemistry — after all that’s what we think we’re here for — and to develop a theoretical intuition about how bonding works. This is the goal for, the primary goal of the first half of the fall semester is to learn how bonding works really, and that relates then to molecular structure; and also how bonding changes, and that of course is reactivity. But under the line there are a lot of other things that we do in Freshman Organic Chemistry that are arguably just as important, like make the scientific transition from school to university. In school they try to teach you what people know. In the University you try to develop new knowledge. So you need a different mindset for that, and we hope this course helps you develop that. So learn from Organic Chemistry, which is really in my view a model science, how to be a creative scientist.So here’s a creative scientist by anybody’s measure, Louis Pasteur. And in the 1880s he said this in French, but in English it says, “Knowing to be astonished by something is the mind’s first step toward discovery.” Another way of putting that is that the characteristic comment on making a real discovery is not “Eureka”, it’s “Huh, that’s funny.” So that’s what you really have to learn; learn enough about how chemistry works and form this picture in your mind that when something happens that doesn’t fit, you know to be astonished so that you can discover something. That’s exactly what Pasteur did, and we’ll talk about that in the course. And even perhaps more important, to develop good taste, so that you can distinguish sense from nonsense; there’s certainly more nonsense floating around than sense, and being able to tell the difference is important. The way you do it is to develop good taste by looking at a lot of good examples and then you’re aware of how crummy the bad examples are. So we’re going to try to emphasize good examples, and have fun. So and as we go along, if you have questions, break in. You’ll do this much more as we go along, I know.So the class really is mostly about theory, although we describe the basis for the theory and spend a lot of time trying to make it real. But we require Chemistry 126L, the lab. This is the only chemistry course that requires you to take a lab simultaneously. So I hope you’re all enrolling in that because there’ll be a certain day that you want to be able to take it. It’s just one afternoon a week, three hours or whatever it is, but you want to get your first choice, so line up soon. You’ll be accommodated but it’s just more convenient if you get it arranged earlier.But why? Because lab answers the really big question. And the big question was brought home to me by my son, John McBride, in his third year. This was the beginning of the third year, and his mother and I didn’t know what was coming. For the next year, maybe 15, maybe 20 times a day, he said, “How do you know?” So here’s John this last summer. He’s now 38 and he has his own three-year-olds to say that to him. And he doesn’t say, “How do you know?” anymore. He now says, “How do you know?” Okay? But that is the main question, how do you know what these things that they told you in school?Well, there are four ways we can talk about of knowing, and two of them are shown on this manuscript from the Carolingian book painter. If we zoom in on the top frame, here’s Moses on Mount Sinai. So the first way of knowing is divine authority. Here he’s going to be the — here’s the graduate student here getting the word. Here’s the teaching assistant over on the left perhaps.  Aaron, right? And then he comes down from Sinai, to see the class, the Children of Israel. So here’s another kind of authority, which is human authority interpreting the scriptures. And here you can see the class; the guys are going like “huh.” And the teaching assistant is off on the side still. But this doesn’t make it. Science is not faith based. There may be other things you know that way but not science. Science ignores divine authority and it ignores human authority; not that they might not exist but they don’t relate to science.Now as you walked in today, did you notice these things over here? There’s an Honor Roll of Chemists, and in fact we’ll use that a lot this semester, and in particular one of the people on there is Michael Faraday, who started in a very humble way. He was a book binder’s apprentice and he bound this book — not this particular copy but this book — which is called Conversations on Chemistry. He bound the first edition. This one is a later edition. So you see it’s Conversations on Chemistry in which Elements of that Science are Familiarly Explained and Illustrated by Experiments. And who’s the author? J. L. Comstock; he’s actually not the author, he’s the guy who stole it. He stole it from a woman, Mrs. Marcet, in England, who wrote this book, which was the most popular textbook — it was written for girls — but it was the most popular textbook in all chemistry, for the first half of the nineteenth century. It went through like 20-some editions. And here you see at the beginning it’s a dialogue, a conversation between Mrs. B and Caroline and Emily, and it’s fun to see this here, what Emily says at the beginning. “To confess the truth Mrs. B, I’m not disposed to form a very favorable idea of chemistry, nor do I expect to derive much entertainment from it.” But in the long run, as you can imagine, they have a lot of fun with chemistry. It was a wonderful book, and still is. But he was binding it, and read it. And look what he says about this, as his introduction to be the leading experimental scientist of the nineteenth century:“Do not suppose I was a very deep thinker or was marked as a precocious person. I was a very lively, imaginative person and could believe in the Arabian Knights as easily as the encyclopedia, but facts were important to me and saved me. I could trust a fact and always cross-examined an assertion. So when I questioned Mrs. Marcet’s book by such little experiments as I could find means to perform, and found it true to the facts, as I could understand them, I felt I had got hold of an anchor in chemical knowledge and clung fast to it.”So the experiments were what did it. So the third way of knowing is by experimental observation. And here’s Richard Feynman. How many of you’ve heard of Richard Feynman? He was a really great physicist, wrote a wonderful textbook as well as getting all sorts of prizes. He spoke to the National Science Teachers Association in 1966 saying,“Learn from science that you must doubt the experts. Science is the belief in the ignorance of experts. When someone says, ‘Science teaches such and such,’ he’s using the word incorrectly. Science doesn’t teach it; experience teaches it. If they say to you, ‘Science has shown such and such,’ you might ask, ‘How does science show it? How did the scientists find out? How, what, where?’ Not science has shown, but this experiment or this effect has shown.”Now, why do we quote Feynman? Because he’s an expert.  Wrong. Though literally, expert, the etymology of expert, is it means someone who has done experiments. We quote him because what he says makes sense. So logic is the fourth way of knowing things. So the two ways that we know things in chemistry, or in science, are experiment and logic. And the lecture is a little bit more focused on logic and the lab is more focused on experiment, and you get an unbalanced view if you do one without the other.Okay, so modern science got underway in the seventeenth century. There’s the seventeenth century, 1600 to 1700. And 1638 was when New Haven Colony was founded, and 1701 was when Yale was founded. So that’s when everything got underway, just when this enterprise was beginning here. Here we are. If you go back 100 years you get to quantum, quantization by Planck; and we’ll talk about that. And if you go back another 100 years you get to Lavoisier and oxidation; and we’ll talk about that. And if you get another 100 years you get to Newton and gravitation; and we’ll talk a little bit about that. And if you go back a little more, another 100 years, you get to Copernicus and the revolution of the heavenly bodies, and Columbus and navigation, and Luther and the Reformation. And these things all have something in common. As Robert Hooke wrote, “The seventeenth century” (his age) “was an age, of all others, the most inquisitive.”All these things have to do with people inquiring into how people know things and finding out new things. And in particular an important figure was Francis Bacon and his Instauration. Now you may not know The Instauration so well, let’s look at that. Here’s Francis Bacon, there are his years. He was Elizabethan and Jacobean. He was almost exactly contemporary with Shakespeare, and with Galileo. He went to school, to university, at Cambridge. And here’s a cartoon that shows him — it’s a modern cartoon — imagining him in a class at Cambridge. Because he wrote of his tutors at Cambridge:“They were men of sharp wits, shut up in their cells of a few authors, chiefly Aristotle, their dictator. All the philosophy of nature” (philosophy meant science in those days) “all the philosophy of nature, which is now received, is either the philosophy of the Grecians or that of the alchemists. The one is gathered out of a few vulgar” (that means ‘common’ of course) “observations, and the other out of a few experiments of a furnace. The one never faileth to multiply words, and the other ever faileth to multiply gold.”So here’s the book he wrote, The Instauration. That’s the frontispiece for it. This picture’s from the Beinecke Library; I went down and got a picture of the book. Notice it was published in 1620. What else happened then? That’s when the Pilgrims came over, right? So the title of the book, rather small under his name and title as Lord Chancellor of England, is Instauratio Magna, which means the Great Restoration. Restoration of what? Of the way of knowing. A bigger, a part of it, it’s called the Novum Organum, which is — and it develops the inductive scientific method, based on experiment, to replace Aristotelian deduction, which is you maybe did one experiment sometime, and then you reason everything from that. But he says no, you have to do more experiments. Now there’s an interesting thing here. One of the devices on the title, on this frontispiece, is two pillars. What in the world are they doing there? Well they’re the same pillars that you see on this. That’s a piece of eight; you know, Treasure Island, pieces of eight? See it’s eight reales, and it came from the silver of Mexico; it was minted in Mexico City. So and there you see the same pillars and on them it says plus ultra; more beyond. Beyond what? What are the pillars? Pardon me?Student: Spain and Africa.Professor Michael McBride: Yes, it’s Africa and Spain, but it’s the Pillars of Hercules, which are the mouth of the Mediterranean, the old Classical World. So there’s the Mountain of Moses in Morocco and the Mountain of Tarik, which is the name of Gibraltar. So here’s the Mediterranean, the Classical World of Aristotle, and you can sail out into the New World and bring back silver, for example. There’s danger of course. But look at what it says at the bottom. What will be brought back? Not just silver. Multi pertransibunt &amp; augebitur scientia — “Many will pass through and knowledge will be increased.” So we go beyond Aristotle into experimentally based science and knowledge will be increased.So here’s some quotes from The Instauratio Magna. “That wisdom which we have derived principally from the Greeks” (no offense, okay?) “is but like the boyhood of knowledge, and has the characteristic property of boys: it can talk but it cannot generate;” “…it is but a device for exempting ignorance from ignominy.” That means it’s a way of hiding your ignorance, and we’ll see examples of that. We’ll talk about, in Lecture 11, about correlation energy, and we’ll talk in Lecture 32 about strain energy, and you’ll see that both of these are just words that are used to hide our ignorance. “…the end which this science of mine proposes is the invention, not of arguments, but of arts” (ways of doing things). “…not so much by instruments” (although new instruments are important, like microscopes and so on) “as by experiments, skillfully and artificially devised for the express purpose of determining the point in question.” (So artificial experiments designed to decide a question; experiments.) “And this will lead to the restoration of learning and knowledge.”So followers of Bacon established The Royal Society in 1662, just after Charles was restored to England, after the period of Cromwell. And there was a history written of The Royal Society, a book about this thick, published in 1667, only five years after it was founded. Why did they publish a history so soon? Well let’s look at this, the frontis itpiece of this book. Here’s the late Francis Bacon, who was said to be Artium Instaurator, the Restorer of the Arts. And here’s the President of The Royal Society, the mathematician, Viscount Brouncker, and here in the middle, being crowned with laurel, is Charles II. Why do they have him up on a pedestal? Because they’re hoping, as scientists have before and ever since, to extract some money out of the government to do their research. They actually never got it from Charles but it wasn’t for lack of trying. And this is why they wrote the history, to try to make the case for being supported.Okay, now let’s look at all the good things that will come from science, from The Royal Society. In the background can you see what that is? We’ll blow it up. Here there’s a hint to it on the bookshelf. If you look really fine on the bookshelf you can see that some of them have writing on the spine. Do you see what that one is? Can anybody read it? What? What science book do you think they might have had?Student: Copernicus.Professor Michael McBride: Copernicus, right? So astronomy; that’s a telescope in the back. Okay, or over here on the wall, what’s that thing? It’s a clock. Why is it shaped like a piece of pie?Student: Because it has a pendulum inside.Professor Michael McBride: Ah, because it has a pendulum inside. So horology, making good clocks. Okay, or here, what’s that thing? It’s hard for you to know.Student: Solar.Professor Michael McBride: It’s a wind gauge. It has a vane inside that it blows on — and you can tell from how far it goes on the scale how strong the wind is. So meteorology. And back here on the pillar, what are those things for?Students: A compass.Professor Michael McBride: For cartography. Now what do all these things have in common that they’re going to do for Charles II? Astronomy —Student: For the records.Professor Michael McBride: Good clocks, meteorology, cartography, what —Professor Michael McBride: They all have to do with navigation, with making England strong at sea. Now back here is another science, Chemistry. That doesn’t seem to have anything to do with navigation. Why would Chemistry be important to Charles?Student: War.Professor Michael McBride: Look at it.Student: War.Professor Michael McBride: To make gun powder. There was a chapter about gun powder in The History of the Royal Society. Okay, and up here at the top is the motto, which is Nullius in Verba, which comes from this quote from Horace, and what it says is, “Lest you ask who leads me, in what household I lodge” (that is, what philosophy I advocate) “there is no master in whose words I am bound to take an oath. Wherever the storm forces me, there I put in as a guest.” So it’s the experiment, not the philosopher, that leads you to the conclusion. So Nullius in Verba is ‘in the words of none.’ And, in fact, the original name of The Royal Society was The Royal Society for the Improving of Natural Knowledge by Experiments.Okay, so we’re going to see, as the course goes along, important experiments that really decided questions, and in fact Bacon’s most important kind of experiment was one that “finally decides between two rival hypotheses, proving the one and disproving the other.” So you can do all sorts of experiments and just be collecting butterflies — no, I don’t mean to insult people who collect butterflies, it’s a fine thing to do. But there’s something special about experiments that really are designed to answer a question. Now Bacon devised a name for such experiments, and they’re based on this model, that you have a road that diverges and you need to know which way to go between these two hypotheses. What do you need, to know which way to go? You need a sign, or this was a cross that you mounted at a crossroads. So the Latin name for cross is crux. Do you see what they call the experiment? Crucial. That’s the origin of the word crucial, right? It’s the one that tells you which way to go. Okay, so here is Isaac Newton and he’s holding something. Can you see what he’s holding in his hand?Student: A candle. Professor Michael McBride: I’ll give you a hint. It’s a prism. Why is he holding a prism? Because that was his crucial experiment; and here’s his diagram in that experiment with a prism in it. He called it the Experimentum Crucis, taking the word from Bacon. Okay, so light came in through a hole in the window, through a lens, and then got bent and dispersed into the different colors. So you get a spectrum here on this thing, the different colors. Now there’s the question, how does the prism make color? Hooke and Descartes thought that light was a train of pulses and as it goes through something like a prism, or as it reflects from a thin layer of oil on water or something like that, that it changes the timing of the pulses and therefore changes the color. But Newton thought that the colors were pre-existing, and the prism just separates them. And this was his crucial experiment to decide between those two theories. You see what he did? He drilled a hole through the board and let through only the red light, and put a second prism there. And he wrote here, three times — he wrote it here, and also here, and also here — nec variat lux fracta colorem; which means “the broken light does not change its color.” So this proved to Newton, at least at that time, that light is a substance, not a train of pulses. What do you think of that proof now? You think light is a substance or a train of pulses?Students: Both.Student: Neither.Professor Michael McBride: But at least you can see that in terms then, that was a crucial experiment, a really important experiment, and that’s the kind of experiments we’ll try to talk about in the course. Experiments are indispensable in Organic Chemistry. It’s an empirical science based on observation, and that’s why you have to take the lab. But so is logic — that was number three and number four of the ways of knowing — logic is important too. So believe what I tell you here only when it makes sense to you. Don’t just cram it in, make sure it makes sense. But what if it doesn’t?Now here’s how to succeed in Chem. 125, and we’ll take as our model science student Samuel Pepys. How many people have heard of Samuel Pepys? Have you heard of him as a scientist?Student: I don’t remember. Professor Michael McBride: What did you hear of him as? What do you associate with Samuel Pepys?Student: Newton-Pepys Problems.Professor Michael McBride: Right in this period, in the heart of the science growth. But what you know him for was his diary, which tells all about life, everyday life in Restoration London. He was actually, as a sixteen-year-old, present when Charles I was beheaded in 1649. Now what’s the connection? Do you know where this is? Anybody been there? Dixwell, Goffe and Whalley Avenues, those are named for three of the 50 judges that condemned Charles I to be beheaded, and they were the only ones that lasted very long, after the Restoration, and they lasted because they fled to New England and were hidden on West Rock. All these roads are heading west toward West Rock. Okay, so that’s a tie-in to the same period. But anyway, he got his B.A. in Cambridge in 1654 and a Master’s in 1656. And he got a good job, he became Clerk of the Acts for the Navy Board, which meant he was the guy that purchased everything for the Royal Navy, all the rope, all the tar, all the lumber and so on. And on July Fourth, 1662 — it’s the fourth of July but it’s more than 100 years before that became relevant — he writes in his diary, “By and by comes Mr. Cooper, mate of the Royall Charles, of whom I intend to learn mathematiques, and do begin with him to-day, he being a very able man… After an hour’s being with him at arithmetique (my first attempt being to learn the multiplication-table); we then parted till tomorrow.”So here was the guy doing all the purchasing for the Royal Navy and he didn’t know multiplication, let alone division. But he worked hard at it. July ninth, five days later: He’s “Up by four o’clock, and at my multiplicacion-table hard, which is all the trouble I meet withal in arithmetique.” He can do the other things pretty well. July eleven: “Up by four o’clock and hard at my multiplicacion-table, which I am now almost master of.” Christmas — so six months later: “…so to my office, practicing arithmetique alone and making an end of last night’s book with great content till eleven at night and so home to supper and to bed.” Or a year later — so he was motivated and he was diligent; that’s good. A year later, on a Sunday: “…I below by myself looking over my arithmetique books and timber rule. So my wife arose anon and she and I all the afternoon at arithmetique,”  “and she has come to do Addition, Subtraction and Multiplicacion very well, and so I purpose not to trouble her yet with Division…” Right?  So he worked with a study partner, and that’s crucial. And Isaac Newton — does anybody recognize this book?Student: Yes, sure.Professor Michael McBride: Right? The Mathematical Principles of Science, of Natural Philosophy. But there’s an interesting thing on the title page. Samuel Pepys is the one who gave permission to publish that book, because he was the president of The Royal Society. Now six years later Pepys encountered a problem with dice. The reason was he went to coffee shops every night for dinner and they’d gamble, and people proposed various kinds of bets, and he couldn’t figure out this one, so he wrote Newton for help. So this was the problem that he wrote to Newton, twenty-second of November. So A has six dice in a box, and he has to throw a Six by throwing it; B has 12 dice and he has to fling two Sixes; and C has 18 Dice but he has to get 3 Sixes to win. The question, “Whether B and C have not as easy a Taske at A, at even luck?” That is, if the dice aren’t loaded or anything, who has the better bet? How many people think that it’s the same? Don’t be shy. How many think it’s A? How many think B? How many think C? How many don’t really have any opinion at all? Good, that wins. Okay, so he wrote this letter to try to get help on his bets from Newton, and Newton replied, four days later, “What is the expectation or hope of A to throw every time one six, at least, with six dyes?” So you get two sixes you still win; that wasn’t clear in the original statement. So he says, “If we formulate the question that way, it appears by an easy computation that the expectation of A is greater than B or C; that is, the task of A is the easiest.” There’s the answer. So Pepys replied on the sixth of December: “You give it in favour of the Expectations of A, &amp; this (as you say) by an easy Computation. But yet I must not pretend to soe much Conversation with Numbers, as presently to comprehend as I ought to doe, all the force of that wch you are pleas’d to assigne for the Reason of it, relating to their having or not having the Benefit of all their Chances.” So he wasn’t ashamed to admit that he didn’t really understand — that’s crucial. “And therefore, were it not for the trouble it must have cost you, I could have wished for a sight of the very Computation. “Can you show me how to figure it out? And he wanted that because somebody might change the terms of the bet and then he wouldn’t know. He wanted really to understand. He insisted on proof. So this is two of the pages from Newton’s correspondence of the letter that he wrote in response, and you can see that Pepys certainly got more than he had bargained for. “So to compute this I set down the following progressions of numbers.” So you can go through all this and you get complicated quotients here, and it turns out that A has 31,031 chances out of 46,656, or 0.6651 chance of winning, and B has this, which is 0.6187; A wins. So is Pepys satisfied with this? Pepys writes back and he says, “Why?” Right? “I cannot bear the Thought of being made Master of a Jewell I know not how to wear.” So he’s willing to swallow his pride to search for really solid understanding. Now compare this with a comment we got at an end-of-semester evaluation in January a year ago. “I never went to his office hours for help because I felt like he would make me feel stupid, because he’s superior to me in chemistry.” I hope I’m superior to you in chemistry.  I’m not superior as a person, but I hope I’m superior in chemistry. You’re paying me the big bucks because of that. So swallow your pride and ask someone for help. Follow Pepys.So read “Pepys and Newton” and get together to do problems for Monday, and contribute to the Wiki when you’re asked to do so. So here are problems. For Friday the problems are optional but very helpful. One is find out which two class members have the rooms nearest you so that you can maybe use them as study partners. You don’t have to use them, use anybody, but use someone, don’t try to go it alone. Two. What are the three most common items of advice from course veterans? So if you click there, or go to the webpage, you can get anonymous advice; I was careful to make sure it’s anonymous. So you can get all — much of it is contradictory, so your job is to look through it and try to get some idea of what they’re telling you that’s worth knowing. For Monday there are problems from that webpage, “Pepys &amp; Newton.” And let me tell you that you better get together with other people to do it, because there’s a lot of stuff there. So get together in a group, parcel out who works on what, discuss what went on and so on. And then for a week from Friday there’s stuff about drawing Lewis Structures, from another webpage about functional groups. So we’ll get to that later, I just wanted you to know what’s coming up. Incidentally, this thing about the problems set that has to do with the mathematics that Newton and Pepys were working on there, has to do with isotope ratios. You know, chlorine has a funny atomic weight. Why? What is the atomic weight, does anybody know?Student: 35.5.Professor Michael McBride: Thirty-five and a half. Why a half? Most of the elements are pretty near integers. It’s because it’s a mixture of isotopes. It’s a quarter of one isotope and three-quarters of the other, and the average is thirty-five and a half; thirty-five and thirty-seven. But in fact it depends on where you get chlorine from, what the ratio is. There’s thirty-five and a half for a standard atomic weight, but it ranges quite a bit, depending on where you get it. So by measuring these ratios, which is a lot like these odds in the betting, you can tell where things came from. You can tell where hydrocarbons came from sometimes that way. And those are the problems that you have to deal with. So it’s not really very, very relevant to the course as a whole, but it’s relevant to the Pepys and Newton thing and it’s a fun problem. So that’s what you’ve got to do for Monday.Okay, and here are the assignments. I emailed all these people. I hope you’re here, and that you picked up on what we talked about today so that you can improve the Wikis from last year. Last year people developed their Wikis from scratch. This time — which is a very valuable thing to do. So I was torn this year as to whether to have you do them from scratch or whether to modify last year. I figured modifying last year is better because then you have something to read earlier on, for those who are not working on developing it. So anyhow, but the hope is — so if you modify it — it has to be something significant, not put a comma in or something like that, but add something useful to understanding. If you do it within thirty-six hours, you get two points, and if what you do is really good, you get three points. So you go to that page and you click on those things and then you can read what — or you can either modify them or read it; it’s a Wiki.Now, we come to the question that we’ll address more. We have another five minutes here. The question we’re really dealing with now, having seen how to work in Chem. 125, is are there atoms and molecules; how do you know? And what force holds them together? Because if we knew that they’re real, and we knew what force held them together, then in principle we might be able to calculate everything. So it would all be theory. So is it springs that hold atoms together? So Robert Boyle — notice he’s right at that time, 1627 to 1691, and he’s the oldest person that’s on the Honor Roll outside the building here, he’s over that way — so Robert Boyle wrote this first important book in chemistry, New Experiments Physico-Mechanical: Touching the Spring of Air. So you know Boyle’s Law, how pressure and volume change, that air in a piston acts like a spring. So PV is a constant; that’s Boyle’s Law. So he developed this science on the basis of a new instrument, the pneumatical engine, which was built by Robert Hooke, the guy we quoted. And there’s a picture of the air pump here with that crank on it, and so on to pump things in or out of that bulb. Now a couple of years later Hooke wrote this book, Lectures, De Potentia Restitutiva, or of Spring, explaining the power of springing bodies. And this is the beginning of that book. “The Theory of Springs, though attempted by divers eminent Mathematicians of this Age has hitherto not been Published by any. It is now about eighteen years since I first found it out, but designing to apply it to some particular use, I omitted the publishing thereof.” So he kept it secret so no one would steal the idea. What did he hope to do with a spring, a really important technology that he could do with a spring? There was a coil in the spring that he depended on.Student: Flying.Student: Pendulum clock. Professor Michael McBride: A new kind of clock, one that could work better for navigation. It was his spring that actually allowed Harrison, 100 years later, to win the contest about making an accurate clock; some of you must know that story. So anyhow he had been hiding this so it wouldn’t be stolen. In fact, it was stolen by Huygens. So “about three years since His Majesty was pleased to see the experiment that made out this theory, tried at White Hall, and also my spring watch. About two years since I printed the theory in an anagram at the end of my book on the description of helioscopes, viz.” this. So this is what he published at the end of this book on helioscopes, and that is an anagram of how springs work, so that later he could prove that he knew it, if needs be, but no one could steal it in the meantime. And if you unscramble it, it’s “Ut tensio sic vis; that is, the power of any spring is in the same proportion with the tension thereof. That is, if one power stretch or bend at one space, two will stress at two, three will bend at three, and so forward.” So here’s his figure that shows that. That’s Hooke’s Law, the force law. The force is proportional to the distortion. So here’s his figure, and he’s got plots of it here. Ut tensio (as the extension) sic vis (so the force). So it’s linear, the force is how much you stretch it. And he has lots of different kinds of springs that do that. Here’s this clock kind of spring, a coil spring, just stretching a wire. So the force is proportional to the extension. Or another way of saying it is, “The potential energy is proportional to the square of the extension.” So it’s a parabola. So that’s Hooke’s Law, and that’s where we’ll take up next time.Professor Michael McBride: Welcome back. You look healthy and tanned. I hope you’re rested and ready to go again. So welcome back to sunny New Haven.We’re lucky this semester to have holdover of all the people that are going to help you–the graduate TAs, Jon and Phillip, and the peer tutors, Eva, Jack, Julia. We’re going to have the PowerPoints, timed PowerPoints available on the website after the lecture and the audio as usual.We’re not going to have a textbook this semester either. But last year I used the Jones and Fleming–this textbook here. So the order I’ll follow is sort of more or less the order that’s there. If you need to buy a textbook, that’s one that would be appropriate. But the one I gave you in the fall will be fine, too. The topics we are doing are generic.So as your remember the first semester we studied bonding and molecular structure. Then toward the end we did some sort of thermodynamics, which is what connects structure to energy, which is what determines what chemistry will happen. So this semester we’re going to talk about that chemistry, about reaction mechanisms, and about using these reactions to do synthesis. And we’ll also do some spectroscopy around the middle of the semester.So just a brief excursion through what we’re going to be doing. The first two quarters of the semester are going to be on how mechanisms are discovered and understood in terms of structure and energy–what we talked about last time. So first we’ll look, naturally enough, at the simplest reactions. There can’t be anything much simpler than just cleaving a bond. But remember there’s also the possibility of making a bond at the same time you break a bond; and we introduced these ideas last semester, of course.So we’re going to start with free-radical substitution, one of the earlier reactions to be studied, as you remember, in the 1830s in France. But we’re going to use it to talk about the concepts of reactivity and selectivity–when you can get different products, how do you control or predict which ones you’ll get?Then the nice thing about free radicals is they’re not charged, so they’re relatively insensitive to solvent. So you can just think about the molecules themselves reacting, whether it’s in the gas phase or solution, more or less the same thing. But it’s quite different when ions are involved either as starting materials or products or both, because then solvent effects are very important. So as we go from free radicals, we’re then going to do solvent effects.Then go on to nucleophilic substitution reactions, which almost always involve ions either as starting materials or products or both. And going to use that as an example of showing how people go about “proving” a mechanism. Then we’ll have the first exam on February 2.Then we’ll go on to electrophilic addition reactions to alkenes and alkynes. You’ll recognize that these are concepts we introduced last semester, but this time we’re going to focus on how you know about how they work. And we’re going to talk there, especially about the role of nucleophiles. You usually call these additions electrophilic, but there’s quite often a very important nucleophilic component as well.Then we’ll get onto polymers and their properties for just a lecture or two. And then conjugation, aromaticity and pericyclic reactions, which you’ll know what they are when we get to them. Then we’ll have the second exam. And then we’ll have an interlude about spectroscopy and go on to more focus on synthesis.So first, spectroscopy for structure and also for studying dynamics of molecules and reactions: so ultraviolet-visible spectroscopy; electronic; IR spectroscopy–vibration, which we’ve talked about a good deal already; magnetic resonance imaging and nuclear magnetic resonance. Then on to aromatic substitution, and finally carbonyl chemistry and the concepts of oxidation and reduction. Then we’ll have the third hour exam.And the last quarter of the course then will be more having to do with carbonyl chemistry; acid derivatives; substitution taking place at carbonyl group; reactivity adjacent to the carbonyl group; the classical condensation reactions; then something about carbohydrates and Fischer’s classical proof of which isomer is which of glucose.And finally we’ll talk about some complex synthesis. We’ll be talking about synthetic ideas all through this, of both unnatural and natural products. Then we’ll have the final. So that’s how long you have to endure.So at the end of last semester we were talking about energy and how it related to things–that free energy determines what can happen at equilibrium–and remember it was all statistics, and the statistics filtered down to give us this handy relationship at room temperature that an equilibrium constant is 10–3/4 of the difference in free energy. Or if you’re not worried about entropy, the difference in enthalpy, in the heat of the molecules. So that’s both energy and entropy the Gibbs free energy. But there’s a completely independent question, which is “Will it happen?” You know, graphite is more stable than diamond as a form of carbon. But the advertisers tell us that a diamond is forever–just because it’s not as stable doesn’t mean it’ll convert in any reasonable time. So the questions of kinetics are just as important as the questions of equilibrium, or at least almost as important.And we saw last time that we could approach this by studying lots of trajectories, trying to calculate how all the atoms move in going from one arrangement to another one. But that really provides too much detail. In fact, over the last couple of weeks we’ve had interviews from people who are applying for a faculty position here, and a number of them are talking about fancy new ways of actually looking at one molecule at a time as it reacts. So that you actually could do something getting closer to trajectories, but really that’s more detailed than we want.We want to summarize things statistically to know what’s going to happen in a flask. So we have collective concepts, enthalpy and entropy, and then we can have a reaction coordinate diagram–remember we rolled a marble on that thing last time, on that potential energy surface. Or we could slice along the potential energy surface and look at the starting material, the transition state and the products. Or we could simplify things to notice that this is just a sequence of three species: the starting material, which is molecules that we know about, the transition state, which we don’t know about, and the products, which we know about.So our challenge is going to be to try to figure out something about the transition state given what we know about the starting material and the products, because its energy relative to those others is going to determine rates. So we have then free energies with just these three species, rather than trying to look at a detailed trajectory.OK. Now. So free energy determines what can happen at equilibrium, but also how fast it happens in kinetics, and for that purpose we need to know what the energy is, either the free energy or the heat, at least, of the transition state. OK. And remember we talked about this last time that in Eyring’s transition state theory, the rate constant for the reaction per second is 1013 times that sort of equilibrium constant between the starting material and the transition state. So again, we can use at room temperature that 3/4∆G when we express it in kilocalories per mole.So we want to use energies to predict equilibria and also to predict rates first for the very simplest one-step reactions. And no reaction is conceptually simpler than just breaking a bond in the gas phase to give atoms or free radicals. So we need to know the energy for that.Now, in the textbooks that I’ve handed out to you there are tables like this one that give bond dissociation energies. How much energy does is actually take to break a bond? This particular one is from a text we used to use in the course called Streitwieser and Heathcock. That was in 1993, but as of 2003 there’s a new set. And you can see that these don’t change very much in time–98 became 99, 111 became 113. Some of them are a little bigger–81 became 85, and so on.And these values I refer to as Ellison’s. I mentioned him last semester–there’s Barney Ellison. He and his friends compiled these new values, and he’s going to come and talk to you about how he did this in April some time. He can’t get out of Boulder now–he’s all snowed in out there, in Colorado. So this is his table of molecular bond dissociation energies for losing H from something. R-H becomes R plus H atom—R radical plus H atom. So these are experimental bond enthalpies. And as you can see, some of them are known to very high precision, like H2 is known to six significant figures. Most of them, of course, aren’t known that well, but most of the ones in this table are known pretty darn well, plenty accurately enough for our purposes.OK. Let’s see if we can understand some of these, so that we don’t have to memorize the table. Let’s look at the bonds from H to halogen. You’ll notice as we go down to larger halogens from fluorine, chlorine, bromine, iodine, we go from 136 to 103 to 87 to 71–quite a difference in the energy involved. So the idea is that larger halogens don’t overlap as well with the hydrogens, so they don’t make as strong a bond at their normal bond distances. And there’s less electron transfer to the halogen.So whereas HF looks like that and the two electrons are lowered quite a bit, in HI the net amount of lowering of the electrons in forming the bond isn’t nearly as much. So that makes sense to us. So less electron stabilization means a weaker bond.Now here’s the Table 2, which is bond enthalpies for various atoms or groups attached to various hydrocarbon radicals. Previously we looked at H attached to halogen, now we’re looking at methyl attached to halogen and you see there’s a very similar trend. It’s strongest for fluorine, weaker for chlorine, weaker still for bromine, and weakest for iodine. So many of the same features.But let’s try to understand different radicals. So we’re going to look at the bonding of H to methyl, ethyl, isopropyl and t-butyl. And the first thing you notice about this is that they’re all almost the same. As we went down the halogens it varied by 60 kilocalories per mole. But as we go across these different methyl, ethyl, isopropyl, t-butyls, they’re all 100 kilocalories per mole, plus or minus 5. We’re going to look next lecture at this in some more detail and see if we can understand why they vary at all. But they don’t vary very much. On the other hand, some hydrocarbon radicals have substantially different ones, like vinyl and allyl, phenyl and benzyl. The vinyl and phenyl are much stronger, 10 kilocalories stronger. The benzyl and allyl are about 10 kilocalories weaker. So let’s see if, based on what we did last semester, we can understand why this might be so.Are these unusual bond dissociation energies to be explained as unusual bonds, that is the bonds are unusually strong or weak? Or is it the radicals are unusually strong or weak? This is compared to what? We have the starting material and go to the products where the bond is broken; we go uphill in energy by these amounts. The question is: are things unusual because the starting bond is weak or unusually strong? Or is it because the radical is unusually stable or unusually unstable? Compared to what?So let’s look at a couple of these cases and see if we can understand. First let’s look at vinyl, which is the H attached to a carbon that’s double bonded. Now if we look at the radical, we see that we have a SOMO, so there’s the possibility for interacting with something and changing its energy. But notice that the HOMOs and LUMOs that it might interact with are π and π*. And there’s no special stabilization because they’re perpendicular to one another, they’re orthogonal, there’s no overlap. So there’s no reason that having this double bond should make that radical unusually stable. And notice that, it, in fact, is hard to break as if this were unstable. But it’s neither stable or unstable, it’s just what it is. On the other hand, if we look at the starting material where we have this C-H bond, notice that as compared to these others, which are 100 plus or minus 5, that this one is made from an sp2 carbon, right? So very good overlap. So in this case, it’s that the bond is unusual. The bond is unusually strong; the radical is nothing special. It’s very hard to break. So it’s hard, it’s 111.The same thing is true in the phenyl radical where, again, the C-H bond we’re talking about is attached to a double bonded carbon. Here it’s part of a benzene ring. But again, the unusual energy orbitals in the ring are perpendicular; they don’t overlap with the singly occupied orbital we’re talking about. Therefore, nothing special here. But again, it’s an sp2 carbon to hydrogen bond, and again, it’s unusually strong, 113 kilocalories per mole. So these are unusual because the starting material has an unusually strong bond.Now let’s look at these others, allyl and benzyl, where it’s an unusually easy bond to break. Now we look at the allyl radical where we’ve broken H off this carbon, and now what’s different about that as compared to the ones above? We broke the H off, we got a p orbital that has the single occupancy. Anybody got an idea about whether it’s going to be usual or unusual? Yeah, Sebastian?Student: π*.Professor Michael McBride: Pardon me?Student: It can mix with the π*.Professor Michael McBride: Now it can mix with the π* because it’s going in and out of the plane. So now it overlaps with the π and π*. Now what’s that going to do?Well here’s the singly occupied orbital, the red one here. Here’s π*, vacant. They’ll mix. That would suggest that the single electron would go down in energy. That would be good. However, we should also think about the fact that there’s an unusually high HOMO associated with the blue orbitals there, the π orbital. So we could consider instead the π. And now we see that that would shift this electron up, but these two electrons would go down. Again you would win – more down than up.Now. So this is a little schizophrenic on the part of the singly occupied orbital. Does it move up or down? The answer is “No.” One of them pushes it down, the other pushes it up, it stays the same place it started. But the others go up and down, the ones that came from the π and the π*. So you get net stabilization due to this pair of electrons going down. So we have this special “allylic,” it’s called, stabilization from mixing the SOMO with the π and π* orbitals adjacent to one another. So this radical is unusually stable.On the other hand, in the starting material, the bond was just a regular old sp3 C-H bond, nothing special there. So as compared to here, where the starting material was unusually strong, here the product is unusually stable. So that was easy to break, 89 kilocalories per mole. And the same is true for the benzyl radical where the p orbital on the adjacent carbon, again can overlap with the π system of the benzene ring. So you get special stability and it only takes 90 kilocalories per mole.OK. So we can understand these special cases of bond strengths, of bond enthalpies.Now, we spoke last semester about the halogenation of alkanes. So we can use these bond dissociation energies to do some calculations about the possibility of doing halogenation of alkanes. So let’s just take as an example methane, some various dihalogen molecules, and we can trade partners, a double displacement sort of reaction, as they called it in the early days, and make CH3X and HX.So we break the red bonds and form the green bonds. So we have a cost to pay in breaking bonds, we have a return from making the bonds, and we’re going to see whether we get a net profit from trying to run this operation. So we’re going to do it for fluorine, chlorine, bromine and iodine. Now, of course, in all those cases the C-H bond is the same, it’s 105 kilocalories per mole.Now, but the halogen-halogen bonds are different. It’s fairly weak for fluorine, strong for chlorine, but then weaker again for bromine, and back to the start for diiodine. What does that tell you that as you go down the rows of the periodic table, you don’t get some monotonic up or down in the bond strength, but it goes up and down? What do you infer from that kind of thing when you get curves?Student: There must be two factors.Professor Michael McBride: There must be at least two factors involved in this. And those factors are probably the overlap of the σ bond, which is best for fluorine-fluorine, but the interaction of unshared pairs which is worst for fluorine. So you have two things going on. OK. Anyhow, we can add those two together to see what it’s going to cost us to break those two bonds. And there are the values: they’re in the range of 150 kilocalories per mole. But then, when we do the reaction, we’re going to profit by making the bonds on the right, so that we have various values for the carbon-X bond that we got out of that table we just showed. And for the H-X bond, and there’s the return we get.Now, are these going to be favorable reactions? Well, in the case of fluorine it’s wildly favorable. It’s favorable by 109 kilocalories per mole. But it’s only 19 kilocalories per mole for chlorine, only 9 for bromine, and it’s 12 kilocalories UPHILL in that case of iodine. So you’re not going to make a profit if you try to set up a factory to convert methane and iodine to methyl iodide and HI. In fact, you’d want to run at the opposite direction. Right? But the others, at least overall, are favorable. So we know from equilibrium now that for three of the halogens this reaction should be favorable. And for one of them it should be unfavorable.But how about the rate? How fast will it be? Now if this were the mechanism, first you break two bonds, then you change partners and re-attach, the activation energy for getting up to the transition state for this where both bonds are broken is going to be this cost. Right? So is break-two-bonds-then-make-two a plausible mechanism? Could we get a rate that’s reasonable on the basis of that? If you know the activation energy you have to get to, how do you go about calculating the rate? Debby?Student: 1013.Professor Michael McBride: Right, it’s 1013 per second, times 10 to the–Student: Negative ¾. Professor Michael McBride: 10–3/4 of that energy. OK. So let’s think about it then in this case. Suppose we take one of these that’s about 140. So at room temperature, 300K, which is where your approximation works, the 3/4, we find that it’s 1013 per second times 10–106, 3/4 of one of these numbers. Right? So it’ll be 10–93 per second. That’s a very unfavorable number. So forget that. There’s no way a mechanism like that could work at room temperature.What might you be able to do to realize such a reaction? Yeah, Amy?Student: Heat it.Professor Michael McBride: Higher temperature. So suppose you go to 3,000K instead of 300K? Now instead of 3/4 it’s 3/40. So if we go to 3,000K, then it’s 1013 times 10–10.6, which would be 250 times a second. Right? So that would be accessible. Except that there probably is something else that could happen when you’re at that very high temperature. So fundamentally this is not a reasonable mechanism.And we already know a better way to go about it from looking at these potential energy surfaces for transferring an atom between two other atoms. Remember we start with H plus H2, and then we can move around on this surface and have, for collinear three Hs, we can get the energy differences between two of the Hs and the other two Hs. So there’s the product we want to go to where a hydrogen has been transferred from the right to the left. And one way to do it, the way we’ve been talking about, is to go by way of three separate atoms. Which means we go up there, way up in energy, very slow, and once we get there then zing, we go down. But it’s very hard to get up to this plateau. On the other hand, as we knew from the marble, the way it actually works is to transfer a hydrogen between two rather than to break a bond first and then make a bond. So make it as you break it that way and that’s going to be much faster. So this kind of displacement reaction is the way we want to do it–to make a new bond as we break the old one. OK. That’s how we’re going to do it, and we already talked about this last semester. First you take chlorine and you break its bond. That’s going to require some energy. But once you have the free radical, then you can transfer a hydrogen atom making a bond as you break a bond. So going through that pass rather than over the big plateau.And now the product of that is HCl, one of the products you want. But the other one is another free radical made without having to spontaneously break a bond. And now it can react with Cl2 to give the other product we want and the chlorine atom, and then we go back to the beginning in this free-radical chain, and this is what we talked about last semester.OK, another way of writing the same thing is to say we could have the starting materials here to the top left and bottom right, the halogen and the alkane, and we could have the X atom that we got somehow.  It could be by heat breaking the relatively weak bond, it could be by light, it could be by some chemical reaction that generates a free radical, but somehow we get a radical. Then it can react in a hydrogen atom transfer to give one of the products, the green XH here, and another radical, and it could react with the halogen to give the other product and go back where we started.So what we have is a cyclic machine that just cranks round and round.  It preserves the radicalness of the situation. You don’t have to break any new bonds spontaneously – only to get the first radical.  We’re going to talk about this some more later onBut to look now at how we’re going to rearrange things – if you want to have a mechanism for a reasonable rate, what you’re going to do is trade two of these columns. Right? Instead of breaking two and then making two, we’ll trade those two columns so that on the left we make and break; on the right in Step 2 we make and break.So now when we look at how much each of these takes, Step 1 now in the case of fluorine is actually favorable. Right? Step 2 is wildly favorable in the case of fluorine and overall it’s very favorable, as we knew. But now you can see that these others, although overall favorable, one of the steps is unfavorable, but not drastically unfavorable–only 2 or 10 or 20 kilocalories per mole. That kind of barrier you could get over; you can’t get over the barriers of 50 kilocalories or more. So now you have two steps, each of them a very simple make-as-you-break atom transfer. And, of course, here the first one is so high that you’re not going to be able to get over it, and even if you could you wouldn’t give the product, the reaction would run backwards.OK. So we know the energies of the starting material and products for each of these steps, but we don’t really know the activation energy–how much you have to come up before you come down. And that’s what we’re going to be starting to look at next lecture, is how could we predict the activation energy for a simple one-step reaction if we know how exothermic or endothermic it is.But even if we could predict the rate of Step 1 or Step 2, there’s still a problem, because the overall process is not just one step, it’s two steps. And how would we know the overall rate if there are two reaction steps going on? This is a little more complicated. So we’re going to take a little digression now to learn to cope with complex reactions that involve several steps. So this is a digression on reaction order and complex reaction.Now the reaction order is the kinetic, the rate, analog of the law of mass action that we talked about at the end last time–remember, it was just statistical, how likely is it that there are going to be two things next to one another? The same thing, getting next to one another is the same problem, if things are going to react with one another in getting to the transition state as well.So there’s going to be a dependence of rate on concentration, the same way that equilibrium depends on concentrations, as we saw last semester. Moreover, this dependence of the rate on concentration can give us information about what kind of mechanism the reaction might be undergoing. So that’s why we’re particularly interested in it. Now just to look at some simple ideas first. The rate is how much per second, say, or per minute or hour a day or whatever, how much per second. So we could have a faucet, we turn it on and the water comes out a certain rate per second. Now what would happen if you had two faucets? Well, if things were simple the rate would double. You know, if you think carefully about it, it won’t quite do that because there might be a restriction in how much water can get to the two faucets. But in a simple point of view if you double the number of faucets, you double the rate.There’s another way of doubling the rate, which is to use a bigger faucet, one that’s twice as big, twice the cross-sectional area.Now in chemistry we can look at how many moles or molecules we get per second. And if we have one beaker and then have another beaker, or a single beaker with twice the volume, we double the rate. So that will double the rate. But chemists are clever. They can not only change the volume, they can also change the concentration in the same volume, and that’s the question we have. Obviously you’d expect it to get faster if you have more stuff, but how much faster? Will it double?So this has to do with what are called rate laws. What that exponent is going to be that says if you double the concentration of a reagent, how much will the rate change, the number of molecules you get per second? So the rate is the increase in product with time. Then there’s a rate law that’s some constant times the concentration of something. And maybe several concentrations, but that question mark is the exponent–what power do we raise it to? That’s what we mean in talking about the kinetic order. If it’s to the zeroth power, it’s a zeroth order; first power, first order; second power, second order and so on. But those exponents will have to do with what the mechanism of the reaction is. So the only way to discover it is by experiment.So let’s first look at some simple one-step reactions, and then we’re going to look at complicated reactions. So in a simple one-step reaction you could have zero order–this sounds weird, doesn’t it? That the rate doesn’t depend on how much material you have. You double the amount of material, double the concentration of material, and it doesn’t change the rate.How can that be? Well here’s a picture that helps illustrate it for sheep getting from one field to the other. Now in this situation, if the shepherd had more sheep, would the rate increase? Would you get sheep from one field to the other faster? No, they’re going as fast as they can no matter how many sheep are lined up. Because it’s saturated. It can’t go any faster because of how wide he’s opening the gate.So there are real cases like this in chemistry where you have a catalyst that’s involved in converting the starting material to the product. When the catalyst is working as fast as it possibly can, increasing the starting material isn’t going to increase the rate of the reaction anymore. The gate can’t open any wider.And that’s often the case with enzymes. So you have the substrate, the starting material, which interacts with the catalyst in order to get a product. But if the catalyst is rate-limiting, if it’s saturated, you can’t go any faster. So the rate then is proportional to how much catalyst you have, of course. If you doubled the amount of catalyst under those situations you’d double the rate. But the substrate is raised to the zero power, it doesn’t make any difference.So the rate is actually just proportional to the catalyst, independent of the substrate. But if doing the experiment you didn’t realize that there was a catalyst in there doing it, you just thought it was happening spontaneously, then you would say it’s zero order. So that’s a zero order reaction, zero order kinetics.But that works only when the sheep are really crowded here. If the sheep were all over the fields and some coming through, if the concentration were lower, then having more sheep would allow them to get through faster. You’re not saturating the catalyst. But it becomes first order in substrate when you have very low concentration of substrate, but at some higher concentration it becomes zero order. So it’s always, in principle, possible to lower the concentration until it becomes first order. But, in fact, under many conditions it would be zero order.So that’s an example of zero order. Now, first order says the rate is proportional to the first power of the amount of reagent you’re using. And that’s, of course, very reasonable–it’s like the water coming through the taps or something like that.Now if you have first-order kinetics, the amount of product you get in time looks like this. It’s an exponential approach to the 100%. Or this particular one is drawn with a certain rate constant. If the rate constant were faster it would rise more quickly. If the rate constant were lower it would rise more slowly, but always it would go, in this case, to 100%.You could, instead of monitoring the product, you could look at the disappearance of starting material, which is then an exponential decay, just the same thing upside-down.So exponential decay means you have a constant, so-called half-life. Now I chose 0.69 here for a reason. It’s because the half-life, the time it takes for half the material to go away, is 0.69 divided by whatever k is. So if I chose k to be 0.69, the half-life is 1. So after 1 second, half of the material remains. After another 1 second, a quarter, then an eighth, then a sixteenth and so on. And that’s the necessary–you can prove it easily by mathematics for a first-order reaction. There is a repeating half-life.Now, suppose you have a more complex situation where it’s first-order kinetics but it’s reversible. So the starting material at a certain rate goes to product, but the product can also come back to starting material, suppose at a much lower rate. So once you reach equilibrium the two rates balance, so things cease changing.In fact, you know, in the nineteenth century, equilibrium situations were initially discussed not as equilibria, but as balanced rates. So at any rate, they’re the same thing. So whatever k1 is times the concentration of starting material will be equal to whatever k-1 is times the concentration of product. Or we could divide through by starting material here and k-1 over here. So k1/k-1 is the equilibrium constant.So now the product doesn’t go to 100% nor the starting material to zero. But if you start with all starting material, you get these exponential behaviors, it’s still exponential. That’s what’s interesting. But it doesn’t approach zero. So here, after 1 second where with that rate constant you would have fallen to half, you don’t fall quite to half, because some stuff is coming back.But if you go to the ultimate goal of equilibrium here, then you find–notice the equilibrium constant is 3, I chose that to be a third of that. So there’s one quarter of the red material and three quarters of the blue material at equilibrium. But if we draw this at 25%, the value that the starting material actually approaches asymptotically, exponentially, we find now there is a repeating half-life–this is truly an exponential. But the interesting thing is that it’s an exponential decay to the equilibrium mixture, but the half-life is 0.69 divided by the SUM of the two rate constants.Again, this is easy to demonstrate using calculus, but it’s just sort of cute that you add forward and reverse rate constants together to get how rapidly it approaches equilibrium. So they’re first-order reactions, both just one-way and reversible.Now, a second-order reaction is proportional to the square of A. That’s obviously true if two A’s have to get together in order to reach the transition state. But it could also be second order if you have an A interacting with a B. In that case you say it’s first order in A and first order in B and second order overall.But what if B is effectively constant? So as time goes on, A is decreasing but B is not decreasing. How could that possibly be the case? How could you have a reaction where B doesn’t decrease?Student: B is a catalyst.Professor Michael McBride: Ah, if B were a catalyst, it doesn’t get consumed. That’s one way. Another way is that the B is in gross excess compared to A. So even though A consumes a B, it doesn’t change its concentration appreciably, because the concentration is so large compared to that of A. So if  is much greater than  you get that. And in that situation you say that you can neglect  by incorporating it into the k. Whatever  is, it’s not changing.For all you know when you’re doing the experiment, you might not even though there’s a catalyst there, but it’s there in always the same amount, you always get the same rate constant. And in a situation like that you say it’s pseudo first order. It behaves as if it’s first order, even though it really depends on something else as well. And so a second-order process could be a pseudo first order rate constant.For example, suppose B were the solvent. Then it appears that it’s a first-order reaction, even though it turned out that the solvent had to react with the thing in order to do it. So that’s pseudo first order.Now, if you have a second-order reaction compared to a first-order reaction, that is a regular second-order reaction where two molecules of A have to get together, what you find is that a first-order reaction goes like this. But the second order starts faster and ends slower. So it’s no longer exponential.Obviously it’s decreasing but not with a half-life, not exponentially, not a repeating half-life, because it gets slower as it goes along, because it depends on the square of the concentration. So it slows faster. It’s not exponential. There is no constant half-life. So that’s how you would know that something is second order. You measure how much in the first increment of time, the second increment, and they’re not exponential.Now we’ll get on to complex reactions and the idea of the rate-limiting step. So suppose that you go to an intermediate and then it goes to product. But suppose the transition state energies are like this. So it’s very slow to get to the intermediate. But once you’re at the intermediate it rapidly goes to product.Now this reactive intermediate never builds up, you never have an appreciable amount of it, because even if it were at equilibrium with this there’s very little of it with a big energy difference here. So you might not even know that the intermediate is there. You get there and it immediately goes to product. In that case, who cares really about what rate this is, as long as it’s fast? The rate at which you get product is the rate at which you get this. It never builds up. Every time you get it, it goes immediately to product, or very quickly.So this first step then, even though it’s a two-step reaction, the first step is the one whose rate makes a difference. If you double the rate of the first step then you’ll double the overall rate of the reaction, because the second step doesn’t make any difference. So that’s called the rate-limiting step.On the other hand, suppose that that first reaction is fast and the second one is slow. So you have a rapid pre-equilibrium formed between these two–again, not very much of the intermediate. But it reaches an equilibrium concentration compared to this, or almost, and then slowly it goes to product.Now two things that are in equilibrium with the same thing are in equilibrium with each other. So to the extent that that intermediate is in equilibrium with the starting material, and we treat the rate of going over here as an equilibrium between the intermediate and this transition state, we could also pretend that the transition state is in equilibrium with the starting material, since they’re both in equilibrium with the intermediate. So now, who cares that there’s an intermediate, that there’s a first step. We can calculate the rate just on the basis of getting how much of this transition state there is by assuming it’s in equilibrium with that starting material. So now the second step or the second transition state is rate-limiting. All we have to know is how high it is compared to the starting material. We don’t care about the intermediate.So you can have one step or the other step be rate-limiting. Or if they’re not drastically different, both of them could affect the rate. Many cases one or the other is rate-limiting. But if you want to see how it works out in a complicated case, where you have a starting material that can go reversibly to the intermediate, and then the intermediate goes to product, all with certain rate constants, on the website you can get an Excel program, which is a crummy Excel program. I’m sorry, it executes very slowly. You can change the parameters to make it go a little faster. But you can put in what energy you want for the starting material, the intermediate and the product; and what energy you want for the transition states, one and two, and see how the overall rate compares with what you would have calculated if it had been just the first step that you had to get over, or just the second step that you had to get over.In this particular case where each of these is about between a kilocalorie and a kilocalorie and a half, the difference between those two and the difference between these two, you get this. So this is the actual rate. Notice the amount of starting material immediately falls quickly–that’s when you’re establishing equilibrium between these two. So starting material is going to intermediate. And then slowly it goes away as the intermediate goes to product.Here is the intermediate. It immediately builds up to some concentration and then it changes very slowly. It stays fairly stable for any short period of time.Now, if you didn’t have the first barrier and had only the second one, it was a one-step reaction. This is what you would have calculated for those same energies. So not too bad. So, in fact, the second transition state is pretty much rate-limiting–you get pretty much the same result.On the other end, if transition state two weren’t there and you only had to get over transition state one, then you’d have that blue one there, if it were the sole barrier. So very far from that. But even in this situation, you don’t make a very big mistake if you just ignored the intermediate and the first transition state, and said it was only transition state two. It’s rate limiting. And if you fiddle with this, you’ll find that if you start changing these differences very much, then one of them or the other one becomes clearly rate-limiting–you get much better agreement. Now, I said that this was between a kilocalorie and a kilocalorie and a half, 3/4 of that is about one, so the equilibrium ratio is about 10–or actually, I said 9 here, 9 times as much starting material as intermediate. So once the intermediate reaches its steady sort of equilibrium relationship with the starting material, this very quick rise here, once you get there, then there’s 9 times as much starting material as there is in intermediate. That’s 9 times as much as this. And that persists then, that ratio. When you get to here it’s 9 times as much of one or the other and so on.Now this is also a factor of 10 between this. But this has to do with rates, remember. So this is how fast the intermediate goes back to starting material is 10 times faster than how fast it goes to product because of those differences in the ∆H of activation. And what that means is that once the intermediate reaches its steady state, its equilibrium relationship with the starting material, it yields product 1/10 as fast as it is formed.So it forms very rapidly, you can see that here. But now individual molecules are still being formed just as rapidly, or almost as rapidly, but they’re going away just as rapidly as they’re formed. Every one that’s formed at a certain rate goes back to starting material 10 times for every time it goes to product–9 times for every time it goes to product. So 1/10 of the time it goes on to product.So now the rate of going from starting material to product is however fast it goes over the first one times 1/10, because it’s not changing. It’s reached the so-called steady state. It’s changing very slowly. Individual molecules are going very rapidly. So the rate of an individual molecule to go from starting material to product is how fast it goes to intermediate times 1/10.So that’s a sequential reaction–the idea of the rate-limiting step.Now a really interesting concept is fractional order. But I see that we’ve reached the time now, so we’ll have to wait for fractional order until the next lecture. 