Professor Robert Shiller: This is Economics 252, Financial Markets, and I’m Bob Shiller. Let me begin by introducing the teaching fellows for this course; and so I have them up here. We have five teaching fellows at this time and they’re from all over. I like to put their pictures up so you’ll know who they are. The teaching fellows are very international and that reflects my intention to make this a course that is also very international because finance is something about the whole world today, not just the United States. So we cover the world very well with our T.A.’s.Usman Ali is from Pakistan, Lahore, and he graduated from the LUMS, Lahore University of Management Sciences. He’s a PhD candidate now in Economics and he’s doing his doctoral dissertation on stock analysts’ recommendations and the relation to returns in the stock market. He’s also interested in behavioral finance, which is the application of psychology to finance. The second teaching assistant — I see him right there, if you could raise your hand — Santosh Anagol, who is a representative of the United States, although he seems to have connections to India as well. He actually has a publication already in the American Economic Review on the Return to Capital with Ghana. He did this jointly with the Chairman of the Economics Department here, Chris Udry and he has spent time in India looking at the village economies. You were going to be giving away cows, did you do that?Student: No, I’m still working on cows but we’re not giving them away.Professor Robert Shiller: Okay, that’s the last time you’ll hear about cows in this course. The idea was to give cows away to village farmers and to observe the outcome. It’s a big change in some of these very poor villages to get a cow.Christian Awuku-Budu is from Ghana, Accra, but he, again, went to college in the United States at Morehouse College. He is also a PhD candidate in Economics at Yale and he’s been doing research on financial markets in developing countries.Yaxin Duan is from China. She got her undergraduate degree from Nanjing University. No? You are from Nanjing, did I get a detail wrong? Where did you go to college? Okay, well I’m sorry about that. She is also a PhD candidate in Economics and is doing research on the behavior of options prices in a phenomenon called the “options smile,” as she’s smiling at me right now. She is also interested in behavioral finance, which is great to me because that’s one of my interests. She is shown here standing precariously on a cliff. It makes me nervous to look at it overlooking Machu Picchu in Peru. She also loves astronomy, which is incidentally an interest of mine too, but you won’t hear about it again in this course.Finally, Xiaolan Zhou is our fifth teaching assistant and she’s also from China, Hubei Province. She graduated from Wuhan University and is a PhD candidate in Economics at Yale. She is doing research on bank mergers.Let me say, I’ve been teaching this course now for over twenty years and I’m very proud of all of my alumni. Many of them are in the field of finance. In fact, I like sometimes when I give — I give a lot of public talks. When I give a talk on Wall Street or even somewhere else in the world I sometimes ask my audience, “Did you take my course?” It’s not infrequent that I’ll get one or even two people raising their hand that they took Economics 252 from me. But I’m also proud of my alumni in this course who are not in the world of finance. I think this course goes beyond — It’s not just for people who are planning careers in finance because finance is a very important technology and it’s very important to know finance to understand what happens in the real world. Just about any human endeavor involves finance. Now, you might say, “I could be a poet and what does that have to do with finance?” Well, it probably ends up having something to do with finance because as a poet you probably want to publish your poetry and you’re going to be talking to publishers. Before you know it, they’re going to be talking about their financial situation and how you fit into it.I believe it’s fundamental and very important. I think you will find this course as not a vocational course — not primarily a vocational course — but an intellectual course about how things really work. I see finance as the underpinning of so much that happens. It’s a powerful force that goes behind the scene and I hope we can draw that out in this course. There is another course — we have two basic courses in finance for undergraduates at Yale. The other one is Economics 251, Financial Theory; this is Financial Markets, that one is Financial Theory. Last year it was taught by Rafael Romeu, because John, Geanakoplos who usually teaches the course, was on leave and so we had to find someone else. I assume that next fall John Geanakoplos will be teaching 251 again.So what happened? Why do we have these two courses? Well it was something like eight years ago that we reached the present situation with two finance courses. John Geanakoplos and I had a meeting and we tried to divide up the subject matter of finance into two courses. We thought Financial Theory and Financial Markets would be the two. But the problem was that both John and I are interested in both theory and applications. John Geanakoplos is actually Chief Economist for a large investment called Ellington Capital in Greenwich, Connecticut, which you’ll see a lot in the news. It has been very successful. He is very much interested in the real world and I am interested in financial theory, so we find it — we decided, after talking about it, that we really can’t divide up the subject matter of finance into separate courses on theory and practice. If you tried to do one alone it would not work, so we decided to divide it up imperfectly and there may be some repetition between our two courses. Both of them are self-contained courses, so you could take either 251 or 252, or you could take both. I think maybe the best option is to take both if you’re really interested in the subject matter. It is true though that his course is more tuned into theoretical detail than mine. John is a mathematical economist and we both love mathematics, but maybe John is going to do more of it than I am.This course actually will not use a heavy amount of mathematics. I try to keep it so that people who are not comfortable with a lot of math can take this course and I wanted to emphasize that this is — I’ve said that it’s — I think this course is vocational preparation in a sense. I pride myself on the fact that people who have taken this course find it useful in their subsequent lives, but on the other hand, I think that it’s really interesting. At least I find it really interesting and so I hope that you will too. Now I don’t know, I may be different than other people, but I think organic chemistry is really interesting. How many of you have that feeling? Can I get a show of hands, who is interested in organic chemistry? I’m not getting a lot of hands raised. Unfortunately, I’ve never taken a course in it, but I’ve started reading it lately out of just my broad intellectual interest. That is a course that has a bad reputation, doesn’t it? Because people say I’ve got to take that if I want to be pre-med. But, you know, to me there’s a lot of detail in organic chemistry. To me, when you read the detail you’re getting into something deep and important about the way everything works and so I start to find it interesting.So I don’t know how people feel about taking — maybe I’m turning you off by saying this — There’s going to be a lot of detail in this course. Maybe I made a big mistake by likening it to an organic chemistry course — I don’t mean to turn you off. The idea in this course is that by being a financial markets course, you have to know how the world works. We’re going to be thinking about that in connection with Financial Theory, but we have to get into the details; so we are going to be learning about facts.Let me start by talking about the textbook. So the principal textbook is Frank Fabozzi, the other authors are Modigliani, Jones and Ferri, Foundations of Financial Markets and Institutions. This textbook is very detailed and it may be — I’ve had some reaction by students — more than you wanted to know.I actually had a great experience reading it. Actually, it was an earlier edition, when I first assigned this book in the year 2000, I took it with me on vacation. I was going to the Bahamas with my family and with Jeremy Siegel’s family — we’ll come back to Jeremy Siegel in a minute. I sat down by the pool with this book. Other people were reading novels and I don’t know what else, but I was reading Fabozzi. I had such a great time with it, so I’m telling you my experience. Maybe it was because it was filling in gaps in my knowledge — things I’ve always wanted to know and was always curious about. That’s partly what you have to develop when you get interested in a field: some sense of curiosity about all the details. So I read the whole book, 650 pages, maybe I kind of read fast because I knew a lot of it. It might take you a little longer to get through it, but I wanted you to have the same experience.I’ve been assigning this book, now it’s in another edition and — Fabozzi is working on a fourth or next edition, I forget what number. I’ve been assigning — I’ve gotten some complaints from students that this book is tough going because there’s so much information in it. I used to tell people, ” I’m assigning the whole book and you have to know everything in the book.” That’s a little ambitious. I finally backed down because I met a man on Wall Street, a very prominent Wall Street person, and he said, “You know, my son started to take your course.” I said, “What do you mean started the course?” He said, “Well, he dropped out when he saw this book and the requirements.” I didn’t like that. I don’t want students to drop out. So what I decided is that you need to know the whole book in the sense that you need to know all of the key terms and key points. Now if you look at the structure of this book, it has sections that say Key Points and Key Terms. Anything that’s mentioned there is fair game for me in an exam and that’s the way I’ve done it. There are key points and key terms. Also, anything in my lecture is of course fair game for the exam. Let me also add that I have a reading list that has clickable things on it and also things that are on reserve in the library. Anything that’s clickable is required reading. I don’t expect you go to the library, however, because I think that we’re moving into an age where you tend to want to be online, right? So the library books are all optional background.Fabozzi, a faculty member here at Yale, has offered to give me — we have at least one chapter from the new edition that hasn’t come out yet. I’m going to put that on reserve in the library; but again, I think that the edition that you have is reasonably up to date and so that’s all that I’m expecting you to read. The other author, Franco Modigliani — in the book, the second author — was my teacher at MIT. He died in 2003. He is also a Nobel Prize winner and I think has a remarkable intellect. So this book, Fabozzi, et al. — Fabozzi, Modigliani, Jones and Ferri — is a very solid book about financial markets.The second book that I’m assigning is Jeremy Siegel, Stocks for the Long Run. This is an old friend of mine. I met him in graduate school. Funny story, I met him because at MIT they signed us all up for chest x-rays alphabetically — that’s the way MIT does things, an orderly way. Shiller and Siegel are next to each other in the alphabet, so I was standing in line with him for an x-ray and was talking with him and I’ve known him ever since. A funny coincidence is that since our names are close in the alphabet — you often find our books right together in bookstores because Shiller and Siegel — if they’re shelving alphabetically — would end up together. He wrote a book called Stocks for the Long Run, starting in 1993. It just came out with the fourth edition and that book was a best seller. I think it sold over a half million copies. I’m not sure where it is now but it has done very well. It’s been a perennial classic. It emphasizes the long run performance of the stock market, but it’s really a general treatise of financial markets. I get a very good reaction from students about this book. This one is very readable. It’s not as intense as Fabozzi, et al. Jeremy Siegel holds the unique distinction — Business Week did a poll asking MBA’s about their favorite professor. This was about ten years ago. They ranked business school professors according to their popularity. He came out number one in the United States as business school professor. I think you’ll like this book.The next book is my own and called Irrational Exuberance. This is the last book — That’s a phrase that was coined by Allen Greenspan in 1996 and it refers to the stock market boom of the 2000s — of the 1990s and the boom and the bust — well I think it’s related to the bust that came out later, after 2000. I wrote this book in 2000 right at the peak of — fortunately right at the peak of the stock market. But what I’m assigning to you is the second edition, which came out in 2005, pretty much at the peak of the housing market. We’re going to talk about both the housing market and the stock market in these different books.These books are all on sale at Labyrinth Books, which is an independent bookstore here in New Haven. I put it there because, well, I think the major chain bookstores fulfill an important function but I also like to support independent bookstores. I don’t know if you know the story, but Labyrinth Books is independent, it’s not a chain, and independent bookstores are trying–struggling — to survive. This is finance. In the book business, there’s something difficult about maintaining an independent operation. Labyrinth was at Columbia University and Yale. For some reason they shut down their Columbia bookstore, but they’ve opened up now in Princeton. There was this famous bookstore in Princeton on Nassau Street called Micawber’s, which is a wonderful bookstore. I’ve been in there a number of times. But they just went out of business. Labyrinth has moved in to take their place. Anyway, that’s where all the books are and they are available now.We’re going to have these lectures on Mondays and Wednesdays. We’re going to have T.A. sections in the second part of the week. We’re going to ask you to look at your schedule sometime before our next lecture and think about when you can come to a teaching assistant section. They will be Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday and we have six problem sets. The six problem sets are due generally on Mondays and we’ll go over the problem sets in the teaching sections, several days after you turn them in. This is one of the biggest classes at Yale, but I think we’ve got it so it will be a good and satisfying experience for you. We have very qualified — I’m very impressed with our teaching assistants. The important thing is for you to stay with them and get to know them and I urge you to attend the T.A. sections. The course is going to be graded. We have two mid-terms and one final. The in class mid-terms — the grades will be roughly 10% problem sets, 20% first mid-term, 30% second mid-term, 40% final. But we will also use judgment and I’m going to appeal to the T.A.’s to help me on judging the grading. Also, I ask the teaching assistants to give me little capsule descriptions of you so that if in ten years, or 20 years from now, I get a call from a reporter asking about this illustrious person who was once my student, I can have something to prod my memory. That’s why I hope you’ll stay with — you’ll each find a teaching assistant and will stay with that person.I want to say something about a particular interest of mine because it is part of this course, although not the entire course. Behavioral finance refers to a revolution in finance that has occurred over the last ten or 20 years and that is incorporated — Behavioral finance is the theory of finance mixed in with the theories of other social sciences, notably psychology, sociology, political science, and anthropology. I think it’s the most important revolution in finance of the last couple decades. Maybe I’m biased because I’ve been very much involved in it. I’ve been organizing workshops in behavioral finance at the National Bureau for Economic Research since 1991 with Dick Thaler at the University of Chicago. We think that we’re avant-garde of a major revolution. The unity of the social sciences is, I think, very important. It’s a mistake to try to consider finance in isolation. There is a whole array of other information related to finance. This will be a theme of my course and also a theme of this book, Irrational Exuberance. That’s what exuberance refers to — it’s a psychological term. So that’s an important element of this course.Another thing that I will be talking about is less important to this course but you have heard of this: the subprime crisis. This is the big financial event that is hitting the United States and the entire world right now. I’m actually writing another book about this. It’s not done in time for you to read but I think I will have it done at some time during this semester. What does it mean? “Subprime” refers to the mortgages that were made mostly over the last ten years or so to subprime borrowers. A “subprime borrower” is somebody who has a poor credit history or some other indication that would suggest that they might not be able to repay the mortgage — they might default. The industry, subprime lending, has grown dramatically over the last ten years and, as you probably know, it’s in big trouble now. What’s happening is the housing market is dropping, home prices are falling, people are defaulting in record numbers, and there are foreclosures. What happens if you don’t pay your mortgage? If you buy a house and you don’t pay the mortgage, the contract says you lose the house — you’re out — you’ve got to pay or it goes back to the mortgage originator. This crisis is very interesting to me because it’s had so many ramifications throughout the financial world. It’s exposing defects in many of our biggest financial institutions and every day we see more news about failures, huge losses, resignations, or firings of top finance people. So it’s a very interesting time in finance. These things happen from time to time, but they happen with enough regularity that there’s something we really want to understand as a systematic phenomenon. So that’s another thing that I will be talking about.Let me make another point about technology. Finance, I believe, is a technology and that means it is a way of doing things. It has a lot of detail. A financial instrument is like an engineering device. Here I’m tying to the engineering — Is anyone here from engineering? A couple of you, well this could be — In fact, some engineering schools offer courses in finance, did you know that? Engineers find it congenial because they have a way of thinking constructively about the world that is kind of parallel to finance. We have theories — mathematical theories — that lead us to devise financial structures, which are complicated devices just like engines or nuclear reactors. They have a lot of components and they have to work right. When people first devise some new financial instrument it typically has trouble. Like when they devised the first engines or the first nuclear reactors, it didn’t work so well at first and then from the experience of many people working on it, over many years, a body of knowledge emerges and that’s what we call technology. So technology is a powerful force in our society and I respect power of this kind. That’s why I like to follow it up. But technology is also dangerous. Nuclear power, for example, may be our salvation when we run out of oil — or virtually run out of oil — it seems to be coming up over the next several decades — we’re going to have to do that, we’re going to need nuclear power. But it’s also dangerous, as you know.The same thing is true about finance. I think that, in a sense, the subprime crisis that we have is an example of the dangers of new technology. We have been seeing financial technology advance in recent years and this advancement of technology has brought us some problems. Some people want to go back, some people think there’s a lot of anger about the subprime prices and there’s some anger expressed against the financial community. I think that we should be very careful not to let that deflect us from the recognition that this is important technology and that it’s not the technology that’s at fault; we have to get it right and then it will be powerful.I’ve had some experience giving talks in less developed countries. I’m not a development economist. Now a development economist — that’s Santosh’s field — Development economics is a very important field in economics that is helping less developed countries emerge. I’m very proud to say that Yale has a strong department at the Growth Center on development economics. I’m not a development economist. Nonetheless, when I’ve spoken in less developed countries, I find that they’re really interested in finance. I think that’s because there’s a growing recognition that that’s what you need to know and that the countries that are emerging successfully are those that have well developed financial institutions that are adopting the technology. They have to adapt it to their own situation, but in many ways they’re copying technology. There’s nothing bad about copying technology, that’s what everybody does. When somebody invented the automobile, before you knew it everyone was driving automobiles and they all looked pretty much the same. When someone invented the airplane, before you knew it every country had an airplane because there was a best practice, there was a best technology and it was not unique to any one country. So that’s why I view this course as fundamentally about technology.I want to say something about morality and about mixed feelings that people have about finance. I know that undergraduates — I don’t know how you feel about finance. Some people have a reaction — If you say you’re taking a course in finance, they think that maybe you’re selling out or maybe you value money too much and that you should really be in some other field. This is a longstanding conflict in our thinking. There is some contempt for finance, I believe, because it makes so much money for many people. Many of our students go into finance. Yale is very strong in providing people to the financial community and, I have to say, they do very well. My first advice is if you want to make money, which I don’t particularly advise, but if you do it’s not a bad idea to go into finance. Just as, you know, you can make a lot of money with organic chemistry too. I think that what you have to do as a young person is develop your human capital and that means knowing how to do things.But there is hostility toward finance that I think is very fundamental to a lot of our thinking. I wanted to say something about that. Part of it is that some people in finance get so rich. If you look at the list of the richest people, they’re all connected to finance, right? I mean they understand it. Maybe they’re not–-Maybe they’re in publishing or some other field but they understand finance and a lot of them are directly in finance. So what do we make of that? Well part of it is that we get very — We get a sort of jealousy of these people because why should someone have billions of dollars? Did they really deserve that? Some people who make a lot of money get self-important–who make a lot of money — and they end up not making a lot of friends in the process.The Yale University Press is publishing a new book by Steve Fraser about Wall Street. He gives examples in this book about hostility toward — it goes way back — In Fraser’s book he gives an example of — I’ve never heard of this person before, but William Durr, who was a financier in colonial America in the 1700s, made a lot of money and helped finance the Revolutionary War in the United States. He ended up being chased down the street by an angry mob. People hated him and why was that? Well it was partly because he got so rich and he started wanting to show off. He had what they called “livery servants,” not just servants, but servants who were wearing livery, like a military uniform. It looked like aristocracy coming back in the form of rich financial successes and we don’t like that. There is a feeling of hostility toward that. There has been a long discussion about what people owe each other and how okay it is to try to make money.I don’t know if you remember — I have to start erasing here — one of the most well known Yale professors of the nineteenth century was William Graham Sumner, who wrote a famous piece called, What Social Classes Owe to Each Other. Sumner graduated from Yale in 1863. He was a member of Skull and Bones — have you heard of that? You know that group? He spent his entire career at Yale and he wrote — He was Head of our social sciences department, before we had separate departments of economics and psychology, etc. He was a very prominent exponent of the idea that people should go out for their own interest. One social class does not owe anything to another and we should not feel guilty about pursuing financial interests. That led to an attitude among a good segment of our society that it’s okay to go out and make money because making money means doing productive things for the economy and ultimately it’s a benefit to society. But we have some discomfort with that.Another book, which I haven’t put on reserve yet but I’m going to, is by Peter Unger, who is a philosopher. It’s a remarkable book called Living High and Letting Die that refers to a more broad philosophical issue that we have. It is that most of us are really making money for ourselves — that’s what we do with our lives — and whether or not that is moral. It’s not just rich people who do that — the rest of us do it also — and in Peter Unger’s book he — On the first page, he has an address and it’s an address for UNICEF, which is the United Nations Children’s Fund, and he starts out his book with that address where you could send money right away. I thought it was very impressive that he put that on page one of the book because it puts the reader in a moral dilemma.He points out that it’s estimated that for every $3 you send to UNICEF, you can save a life. That’s because there are people in this world who are not getting medical care. There are people who are dying of diseases for which there are known cures because they don’t have the best medicine, which are often not even expensive but they’re living in such poverty. So he says, why don’t you stop right now and send $100 to UNICEF. It was very impactful to start a book that way because I doubt that hardly any readers actually write out a check on the spot to UNICEF; but if you don’t, then you are in some sense responsible for the loss of 30 lives. It’s quite striking and it helps you to reflect on what makes us behave the way we do. By the way, when you go back to your computer, Google UNICEF, and you can give $100 to UNICEF within the hour. Maybe I could ask for a show of hands of how many people did that. I expect that not many of you will and I don’t think that proves that you are bad people — this is a very interesting philosophical question — but what it means is that there is a moral dilemma underlying all of our economic lives and I think this moral dilemma is the same as the moral dilemma in finance. It’s just that people in finance are sometimes very successful and they could give a lot more than $100 to UNICEF.One thing that I wanted to emphasize in this course, or try to emphasize, is that part of finance is actually philanthropy. The most important — The most successful people in finance, I believe, end up giving the money away and that means — you can’t consume a billion dollars. There’s no way that you can do that. You can only drive one car at a time and if you have five cars — well I mean that’s kind of — all right you could have five cars and you could drive a different one everyday, but it’s starting to seem a little ridiculous, right? At any rate, you’re not using them and they’re going to end up being used by somebody else. So I think the outcome should be philanthropy and those of you who are successful really ought to give it away.I’m bringing in outside speakers as part of this course and, among them, I’m going to bring in people who I think have been philanthropists. That’s the mode of thinking that is most attractive when you think about financial markets. So let me tell you about — I have slots now for four outside speakers. I’ve lined up two of them and let me tell you about the two that I’ve already lined up. The first one is our own David Swensen. David Swensen came to Yale University in 1985 from Wall Street, although he was a Yale graduate. At that time the Yale endowment was actually slightly under one billion dollars. What is the endowment of Yale? The endowment is defined as the financial assets that Yale University owns. Yale also has an art collection, which is worth many billions, but we don’t count that as part of the endowment because they will never sell it so it doesn’t provide income for us.Yale also has a physical plant, like this beautiful building that we’re in, but that’s not part of the endowment either. The financial assets that Yale had, at that time, were about one billion dollars. Since then, David Swensen has invested or has managed the investment of this endowment and it has done phenomenally well. Yale now has over twenty-two billion dollars in its endowment. The return he got from 1996 to 2006 was 17% a year on investments. Last year the return on the Yale portfolio was 28% in one year. Now I don’t know how impressed you are, the year before that it was 22% in one year. Now some of this might be luck but I don’t think it’s all luck because he’s done this consistently for so many years. If you look up around this campus now, you’ll see a lot of construction, a lot of things are being spruced up and improved. I think David Swensen has had a big hand in doing that because we have the money that makes it possible. The endowment at Yale is something like two million dollars per student now that’s just sitting there as money that could be spent.How did he do this? That’s one of the amazing things. It seems to have something to do, I think, with academic understanding. That being part of a university community is a good thing for investing and you can see some evidence in that. Harvard University, Princeton University, and other universities have done extremely well on their endowments; however, not quite as well as Yale. Yale, I think, is the number one performer so it’s very interesting that we’re able — it’s very significant that we’re able to get David Swensen. He doesn’t do a lot of public speaking but he is willing, for young people like you, to do this — so that’s one of our outside speakers. He also has two books about investing that we’ll talk about.The second person I have set up now to come — although the date on the syllabus online is going to be changed — is Andrew Redleaf, who is also a Yale graduate and who set up a hedge fund called Whitebox Advisors. It has done phenomenally well in investing. I think — I have on the syllabus a New York Times article about him. He’s a very original and creative thinker who looks at things from a unique perspective and I find it very interesting talking with him. To do well in investing you have to have your own independent view of things and really be thinking about how things work and he is someone who does that. Incidentally, the New York Times had another article about Redleaf, saying that he was really one of the first persons to clearly delineate the subprime crisis that we’re now in. He saw it coming and, I have to say, profited from it. If you know the subprime crisis is coming, then there’s always a way to profit from that and that’s what he did. But he also has a philanthropic side so it all comes out very well.I think in the remaining time I will just go through an outline of the course and that means go through the topics of the various lectures and then I’ll let you go for today. So the way this course is divided up is different than the Financial Theory course. If you look at John Geanakoplos’s course on Financial Theory, his mathematical concepts are central to his outline of the course; but this being a Financial Markets course, I’m dividing it up more in terms of markets and institutions. I still want to start with some theory and I thought that — well I will — I plan to start by talking about the most basic concepts of risk management, which underlie finance. That will be Wednesday’s lecture. I call it the universal principle of risk management pooling and the hedging of risk. I think it’s the most important theoretical concept that underlies finance and insurance, which we’ll also talk about a little bit in this course.The idea is that if you spread risks they don’t disappear, they’re still there, but they’re spread out over many people and the impact on any one person is reduced. So a basic principle of insurance is that if each person or each family suffers the risk, for example, that a parent, father or mother, might die then it is a terrible blow to the family; but it’s not a blow to society as a whole because people die and it has a certain statistical regularity. It makes sense that we pay families who have lost a father or a mother so that they can keep going. It benefits everyone to have a situation in place for that. I wanted to talk about that with a little bit of reference to probability theory and so that’s what I will be covering. The next lecture will be among the more mathematical, although it’s very elementary. If you had a course in probability and statistics, then you’ll find it easy to follow, but it’s self-contained again. I feel like I have to introduce concepts like variance and co-variance and correlation in order to talk about finance; so that’s what we’ll do in Lecture Two.The following lecture — I want to come back to some basic themes that — the third lecture — about technology and it relates to another book that I wrote. I’m not assigning it, but I wrote a book called New Financial Order in 2003 about technology and finance. A theme of that book was that — I’ve already said this to you, but it’s a very important point — financial technology is evolving and improving just the way engineering technology or biochemical technology is improving. It’s getting better year by year and the course of finance over your lifetime will be dramatic, so the financial institutions that we have ten years from now will look very different from the ones we have now.We have to understand — in understanding the progress of financial technology — is its fundamental relation to information technology. Computers, the Internet, and communication devices are fundamental to financial progress and they make things possible that wouldn’t have been possible before. Oftentimes, inventions that seem, in the abstract, to be good ideas may be impossible because something that you have to do to make it actually come into practice is too expensive and so it’s not economic to produce the invention. But then developments in other fields can change the relative prices and suddenly make an idea that had been hypothetical and unapplied suddenly work well. So financial inventions also involve experimentation. Like in any other invention, nobody knows what will work and abstract theory doesn’t guide you completely. Once an invention is seen to work it is rapidly copied around the world. We can see various breaks in financial history when some new idea was suddenly proven workable. Traditionally, financial inventions were not granted patent rights, but now in the United States and in a number of other countries it has become possible to patent financial inventions. I know I’ve done that in my life and so I think it gives a different perspective on finance.Then I want to talk about insurance. The institution of insurance is something that really came in — it’s one of the earliest — I consider it a division of finance — really came in the 1600s when probability theory was invented. The mathematical theory of probability was unknown until that time and you can see that insurance suddenly made an appearance at that time. This will be an historical as well as a theoretical discussion of insurance.Then I will move to portfolio diversification and supporting financial institutions. This is again a more theoretical lecture. It will be about the capital asset pricing model. It will be about the securities market line, about the beta, about the mutual fund theorem, and it will also be about institutions that we have — about investment companies and their management. So it’s really parallel to an insurance discussion. Insurance pools risks like life risks or fire risks by writing policies to individual policyholders. Portfolio management pools risks in a different way: by assembling a diversified portfolio or a portfolio that’s negatively correlated with a risk that someone has.Then I want to go to the efficient markets theory. “Efficient markets” is a theory about — well it came in about three decades ago, maybe it’s closer to four decades ago — it’s a theory that financial markets work very well and incorporate information very well. The efficient markets hypothesis was encouraged — actually the idea goes back over 100 years — it’s encouraged by the observation that financial markets seem to respond with great speed to new information and, when new information appears, prices will suddenly adjust in the financial markets. Certain kinds of financial markets called “prediction markets,” which may, for example, predict the outcome of an election have been seen to be very accurate predictors, often better than pollsters can manage. So there seems to be some deep wisdom of the market. I think that “efficient markets” is an important concept. On the other hand — and this is something that I want to emphasize — you don’t want to carry that too far and one of the lessons of behavioral finance is that markets are not really efficient in a global sense. Human psychology drives markets a great deal. If markets were perfectly efficient, David Swensen could not have done what he did. It would not be possible to make excess returns in finance. I believe it’s clear that it is and that people who do so are people who understand more than the core efficient markets theory. They understand something about human nature and how human nature interacts with our institutions.The next lecture is about behavioral finance and I want to talk in that lecture about research and psychology, things that come out of another department here, the psychology department, which has traditionally been ignored in economics and finance but is coming back. I want to talk about Kahneman and Tversky’s Prospect Theory, which is a very important and a little technical — psychologists can become mathematical and technical as well. It’ll be an important part of our understanding of financial markets.Then I want to talk in the next lecture about regulation, which means government oversight of financial markets and not just government oversight, there are also the so-called self-regulatory organizations that are created in the financial industry to self regulate. So, for example, FINRA, which used to be called The National Association for Security Dealers, is a membership organization of people in the financial community and it imposes rules on its members. It’s not a government organization but it is a regulator. The problem is that not everyone is nice and not everyone is high-minded so financial markets — the success of financial markets is, in many ways, a success of regulation. Governments establish regulators who set down rules for participants in financial markets and these rules may be perceived as onerous and costly to people in the financial community, but ultimately it’s their salvation and it’s what makes everything possible.After that, I want to talk about the debt markets. Debt is the simplest of financial instruments. It consists of a promise to pay, usually denominated in currency, and there are both long-term and short-term debt instruments. The shortest term debt instrument in the United States is the Federal Funds Rate, which is an overnight rate — one day maturity — and the longest issued by the Government is a thirty-year government bond, which will be repaid three decades in the future. There have also been one hundred-year bonds and there have also been perpetuities that — in the UK, for example, the British Consoles — have no expiration date and they have infinite maturity. So the debt market is something worthy of studying because it really represents a market for time itself.What is it that we’re talking about when we talk about the rate of interest? It has units of time, it represents the price of time, and it is something that fluctuates through time in interesting patterns. They are very important drivers of our economy and our lives. The theory of the term structure is the theory of how interest rates differ according to maturity or term. There are not only debt instruments that are payable in currency, but there are also indexed debt instruments that are indexed to the price level so that they give real interest rates. We’ve had episodes in our history when real interest rates have made major moves and these movements are very important for what is happening in our lives. Most recently — A few years ago, we were living in a regime of negative real interest rates, when the Fed was pursuing a very aggressive monetary policy. I suspect that with the subprime crisis the Fed will be pushing real interest rates down dramatically again and we may be in a period of negative real interest rates again.After that I want to talk about the stock market and I want to — there’s a lot to talk about. Of course, stocks are shares in companies and they’re traded on stock exchanges and they’re interesting to analyze because there’s sort of an ambiguity about stocks that is not widely perceived by a lot of people. That is, share repurchase can change the units of measurement in a security and companies have to decide how leveraged the stock will be, which changes the stock price — leverage, meaning how much debt the company takes on. Moreover, companies have to decide how much dividends to pay on the stock. That’s a decision of the management of the company and we have to understand how they make that decision and what that means to people who are valuing stocks. It’s a very simple idea. The idea of dividing a company up into shares and selling them off, but in practice it involves a lot of complexities. We’ll be talking about the Modigliani-Miller Theorem and related issues in this lecture as well as something about the behavior of the stock market and its tendency to go through dramatic movements. For example, like it has done recently if you’ve been following it earlier this year.The next lecture will be about real estate and that brings us into the subprime crisis and connects with interests that are central to my own thinking. The housing market is a huge market. Right now the total value of single-family homes in the United States is about twenty trillion dollars and the market has been becoming increasingly speculative. Home prices have become unstable. Nationally, home prices in the United States rose 85% between 1997 and 2006 in real terms — in inflation-corrected terms. We’ve seen almost a doubling in the price of the average home in the United States. Why did that happen? Now they are falling and in real terms home prices have fallen almost 10% since the peak in 2006. This is not just a U.S. phenomenon; many countries around the world are experiencing home price booms and the beginnings of what might be a home price bust. I want to consider the market for homes and the market for mortgages, which are the instruments that finance homes. To what extent was the housing boom that we saw in recent years the result of revolution in financial technology? There have been many changes in our mortgage institutions that might be part of the reason for the boom in home prices. There’s also a question of psychology.The following lecture will be about banking, the supply of money and the money multiplier. It’s also about: how banks operate; what their function is in our society; and, why they are such important institutions that have gone back for hundreds of years and remain powerful, central features in our economy. It’s also about bank regulation, such as the Basel Accord, Basel I and Basel II. I also want to talk about the impact of information and technology on banking.The following lecture is about monetary policy. What do central banks do? In the United States, the central bank is called the Federal Reserve. In the United Kingdom, it’s the Bank of England. In Japan, it’s the Bank of Japan. And in Europe, it’s the European Central Bank. All of these banks are really in control of short-term interest rates and these interest rates are used to try to manage and stabilize the economy. In response to the subprime crisis that we are now in, our central bank, the Federal Reserve, has been cutting interest rates aggressively to try to save the economy that appears to be declining. I want to try to understand in that lecture — help us to understand how this works and how we’re getting solutions — possible solutions to these problems.Then I want to talk about investment banking. An investment bank is a different kind of bank. I was talking, up to this point, about commercial banks. An investment bank is not a bank that accepts deposits; it doesn’t deal with the general public. Instead it deals with financial institutions and it gets involved in underwriting securities for financial institutions. It’s a very important industry and it’s also one in which many of our students have found jobs, so I think it’s important for us to try to understand the history of investment banks, the role they have in our financial community, and how they’re regulated.Then I want to talk about money managers — professional money managers — people like David Swensen. This is a community of people in a different segment of the financial industry. These are people who manage portfolios. We want to think about what kinds of forces operate on them and what kind of — I’m interested in viewing them partly as people who are experts in a certain kind of technology who live in a very competitive environment and try to understand why some of them succeed much more than others. It also relates to behavioral finance. That is, ultimately they are human beings like anyone else and some of their differences in success or failure may have to do with their own interconnections and their own psychology and interpersonal psychology.Then I want to talk about brokerages. Those are institutions that arrange for or manage the buying and selling of financial assets, such as the New York Stock Exchange. Now the brokerage industry — The New York Stock Exchange goes back into the eighteenth century, it’s very old. In fact, the idea of the stock exchange goes back to the fourteenth century, when in Flanders the first stock exchange called The Bourse was established. So it goes back many hundreds of years but it’s in rapid change now because of information technology. It’s one of the most rapidly changing, hard to keep up with areas because someone can set up an electronic exchange overnight and suddenly become a base for trading trillions of dollars of securities. It fits in well with the theme of this course about technology because in understanding what’s happening with brokerages, our technology, the new information technology, is central.Then I want to move to futures markets and forward markets. A forward contract is a contract made between two parties for execution in the future. Generally these are called over-the-counter contracts because they’re not arranged through exchanges. We also have standardized contracts that are traded on exchanges and they’re called futures contracts. The futures contracts were invented in Japan in the 1600s at Osaka and they were developed for the rice market in Japan. They were uniquely Japanese until pretty much the nineteenth century and then they were copied all over the world and are now very important. I’m going to talk about one futures market that I have been instrumental in developing. I’ve been working with the Chicago Mercantile Exchange to create a futures market for single-family homes, which is sort of my connection to the futures industry.Of course, there are many futures markets that we’ll talk about. They’re very interesting to me and I wonder why the business community isn’t more aware of them. A futures market has a prediction going out years into the future of what every financial variable will be doing, so you can see the future in a sense through the futures prices. It’s not always correct to think of it that way — we have to get into the theory of futures markets. In many cases that is not the right way to think about futures prices, but there are very important futures markets that — In the next lecture I want to talk about the various kinds of futures markets that matter. We have a stock index futures market and notably we have an oil futures market. The oil futures market is very significant because it represents the price of energy on dates into the future. We can now see the price of oil going out years into the future. We’ve just hit $100 barrel price of oil, but what does that mean? Does that mean we’re going to live in a world with $100 oil? Well not if you look at the futures market, which is in backwardation now and it’s predicting major drops in the price of oil.Then I want to talk about options markets — this is getting close to the end of the course. An option is the right to buy something. Typically, we think of it as a stock option. An option is a contract that says you can buy so many shares of a company. The options have been traded for several decades, starting with the Chicago Board Options Exchange. But now there are many options exchanges. We have prices of options that change minute by minute. Now what do these changes and these prices mean? The options are a very useful technology for managing risks and I think that we’ll see a rapid — Over the next few decades, we’ll see rapid expansion in the scope of options contracts traded on the exchanges.Finally, for the last lecture for this semester, I want to pull this together and talk about one of the themes that is summarized in terms of a theme of this course: the democratization of finance. Finance used to be a very esoteric field that only a few people in London and Paris and other world centers understood — Amsterdam and other places where financial technology emerged — but it’s becoming democratized. With each year that goes by the concepts of finance are being applied more broadly and involving more and more people. With electronic technology, it’s becoming more economical to offer sophisticated financial services to everyone. This is something that we’re seeing. I think the subprime crisis that is the current financial crisis highlights this very well. What does subprime mean? Well I think it stands for the general population. The subprime mortgage market was bringing people into the mortgage market who in prior decades would not have been involved — would not have had any mortgage. The problem, of course, with the democratization of finance is that if you raise the participation in financial markets, then you bring in people who are: less and less knowledgeable; less and less understanding of concepts of finance; and less capable and more vulnerable to exploitation. So the democratization of finance is, I think, the ultimate mission of — I find central to this course but it brings with it dangerous hazards and we have to think very carefully about how we do it.Professor Robert Shiller: OK. Welcome to Economics 252. This is Financial Markets, and I’m Robert Shiller. This is a course for undergraduates. It doesn’t presume any prerequisites except the basic Intro Econ  prerequisite. It’s about–well, the title of the course is Financial Markets. By putting “markets” in the title of the course, I’m trying to indicate that it’s down to earth, it’s about the real world, and, well, to me it connotes that this is about what we do with our lives. It’s about our society. So, you might imagine it’s a course about trading since it says “markets,” but it’s more general than that.Finance, I believe, is, as it says in the course description, a pillar of civilized society. It’s the structure through which we do things, at least on a large scale of things. It’s about allocating resources through space and time, our limited resources that we have in our world. It’s about incentivizing people to do productive things. It’s about sponsoring ventures that bring together a lot of people and making sure that people are fairly treated, that they contribute constructively and that they get a return for doing that. And it’s about managing risks, that anything that we do in life is uncertain. Anything big or important that we do is uncertain. And to me that’s what financial markets is about.To me, this is a course that will have a philosophical underpinning, but at the same time will be very focused on details. I’m fascinated by the details about how things work. It can be boring, and I hope I’m not boring in this course, but it’s in the details that things happen. So, I want to talk about particular institutions, and I’m interpreting finance broadly in this course. I want to talk about banking, insurance –sometimes people don’t include insurance as part of finance, but I don’t see why not, so we’ll include it. It’s about securities, about futures markets, about derivatives markets, and it’s going to be about financial crises. And it’s also about the future. I like to try to think about the future, although it’s hard to do so. Where are we going?This course will have a U.S. bias since we live in the United States. I know the U.S. better than any other country, but at the same time, I recognize that many of you, or even most of you, will work outside the U.S., and so it’s important that we have a world perspective, which is something I will try my utmost to incorporate in this course.The world perspective also particularly matters since we have other viewers for this course besides those people in this room. This course is one of a couple dozen courses that Yale University is offering free to the world as part of Open Yale. And that means there’s a cameraman back there if you’ve noticed. That’s Dan Cody filming the course. And it will be eventually posted on the Internet and it will be available through Open Yale, and then by proliferation, you’ll find it on many other websites as well. This is the second time this course has been filmed for Open Yale. The first time was in 2008, three years ago. And I’m very pleased to report that I have a lot of people in every imaginable country who have watched these lectures. And I get emails from them, so I know that they’re out there.But I thought that this course needs updating, probably more than any course on Open Yale. You know, a course in physics only has to be updated for the last three years of research in physics, and it’s probably not a big thing for an undergraduate course. But finance really has to be updated, I think, because it’s going through such turmoil and change right now. We’ve had the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression, and it’s been a worldwide crisis. And governments around the world are working on changing our financial institutions. We have organizations of governments, notably the G20, which is very involved in finance. It’s one of the top items on their agenda for international cooperation; it’s changing our financial markets. So, I think that that’s another reason why I want to try to keep as international a focus as I’m good at doing in this course.But I hope that those of you who are in this room are not disturbed by the camera and feel you can ask questions. You don’t have to be on camera. I think I’m just being filmed. So, that’s where we are.Now, I wanted to put this in a little bit broader context. The other major finance course that we have here at Yale is Economics 251 and it’s taught by Professor John Geanakoplos, who is a mathematical economist and also a practitioner. He’s research director for Ellington Capital. So, he’s somewhat like me in that he’s interested both in theory and practice. But his course is definitely more theoretical and mathematical than mine. His is entitled “Financial Theory.” And I can read some of the topics that–and his course also will appear on Open Yale shortly. You can take the whole course. But I don’t know–it’s not up at this moment. It will be up in a matter of months.So, I encourage you, if you want to, to take Open Yale Econ 251. But the things that he talks about in that course, if you read the topics in this course you’ll see that they’re more mathematical and technical than mine. He talks about ”Utilities, Endowments and How It Leads to Equilibrium,” ”Assets and Time,” ”The Mathematical Theory of Bond Pricing,” ”Dynamic Present Value,” ”Social Security and the Overlapping Generations Model,” ”Uncertainty and Hedging.” I’m quoting his titles. ”State Pricing.” That’s kind of an abstract theory. We talk about the price of a state of nature. I won’t explain that. He talks in some length about the ”Theory of Risk” and the ”Capital Asset Pricing Model,” and about the ”Leverage Cycle,” which is relevant to our crises.So, I recommend you take Econ 251, but I don’t expect you to take it. This course is self-contained. And I’m going to keep mathematics to the minimum in these lectures. But the idea here is that we can’t avoid it completely. I personally am mathematically inclined, too, but I’m understanding that we have divided our subject matter. So, John Geanakoplos is doing the math and the theory, and I’m doing the real world. It’s not a complete division like that, but it’s something like that. So, I’m going to stay to that. I’m going to talk more about institutions and history than about mathematics.Since I know that most of you or many of you will not take Economics 251, what we are doing is, I’ll give a little indication of the mathematical principles, more intuitive, and we have review sessions with our teaching assistants. We plan to have six of those. And those will be on a Friday in this room. And they won’t be on Open Yale. Those will cover the theory, and it will be like a short form of Geanakoplos’ course. And then we’ll have problem sets. And there will be six problems sets, one for each of those sessions. So, there will be some math in this course.I wanted to talk about the purpose of this course, to clarify it. One thing is, what do I imagine you’re going to do with this course? Well, first of all, I pride myself that I think I teach–if I might boast for a minute–I think I teach one of the most useful courses in Yale College. At least that’s the way I think about it. Because this course really prepares you to do things in the world. By the way, I’ve been teaching this course now for 25 years. I first taught it in the fall of 1985. Now I don’t know if that’s depressing or not. To me, it’s great. I like to be able to keep moving ahead. I wonder what my 1985 course looked like? Unfortunately, they didn’t do Open Yale and I can’t go back and look at it. But I think I’ve gotten more philosophical and maybe more real world oriented as time has gone by. But the excitement I have is when I go–I give a lot of public talks, and it’s often on Wall Street. And when I do one on Wall Street, I like to ask people for a show of hands. How many of you were in my Economics 252 class? And I typically get one or two at least who raise their hand. So, that’s a source of pride to me, that I was involved in the beginning of their careers. And I hope I instilled some kind of moral sense to what they do.But I should say I don’t think that most of you will go into finance, because I think that most of you have other purposes. What does it mean to go into finance? Well, it sounds like that means you would be listed as someone who is very focused on finance. But I think everyone should know finance. This should be a required course, actually, at Yale College, because finance is so fundamental to what we do and the structure of our lives that I don’t see how you can avoid doing finance if you want to do something big and important.Maybe you don’t want to do that either, so you might want to become a hermit and then you don’t need finance. But to me, I like to think that many of you have a sense of purpose in life. I should say–that sounded funny, didn’t it? But what I’m saying is your purpose is not to make money. And this is one thing about finance that bothers me, is that people think that it’s a field for money-grubbing people who just want to go out and make money. And I don’t think so. I think it’s a technology for doing things, and you don’t want to be mystified by it. When someone talks some financial jargon, you don’t want to say, I don’t have a clue what that’s about, because what that’s about is how we make things happen. And so, I hope that you have other purposes in life besides finance, even those of you who go into finance.But the question is whether this is a vocational course. Here at Yale College there has been a long tradition that we are not a vocational school–I suppose you know that–that Yale is a liberal arts – we teach you the arts and sciences. I actually went to look at the charter and the act of the Connecticut government in 1701 that founded this university. This university was initially mostly a training ground for the ministry. But I actually read in the Acts of the Governor and Company of the Colony of Connecticut: “Yale College is founded for the educating and instructing of youth in good literature, arts, and sciences.” I think that is the motive here for this university. And so, I think it is in some level vocational, but it’s not vulgar vocational. I want you to think about what we’re doing and how it fits into what you do for your life.So, I think of finance as a kind of engineering in a way. But it’s an engineering that works not with what we call a technical apparatus, but with people. And so, if we want to understand how to do these things, we have to get some technical apparatus under our belt. And that’s what I’m going to try to do in this course.The textbook that I chose for this course is by Frank Fabozzi, who is a professor at the Yale School of Management–well, with two co-authors. We have Franco Modigliani, for whom I have some personal affection, because he was my dissertation adviser at MIT, and who unfortunately died in 2003, and Frank Jones of Guardian Life Insurance Company. I’ve also written joint papers with, well, two of the three authors. I’ve written joint papers with Fabozzi and with Modigliani–research papers. But they’re similar to me in many ways. They’re interested in the details. I hope you get interested in the details.I find this textbook fascinating for me. Well, I first read this book when I first started assigning it. I was going on vacation with my friend Jeremy Siegel and our families, who’s a professor at the Wharton School, and I brought this book as my poolside reading. And I was sitting there with this book. Other people were reading novels and fun things. I don’t know what they thought of me reading this textbook by the pool, but I thought this is great because I thought I knew most of what’s in here, but there’s a lot of things that I still didn’t know and it was answering all kinds of questions. Things you always wanted to know about real estate securities, OK, but you never found out. Well it’s all answered here. So, I hope you can take that spirit in reading the textbook. That’s the only book you have to purchase for this course. And it’s the main work that you have.So, I’m going to ask you about the details on exams. The kinds of municipal securities we have and how the rating agencies rate them, that’s part of this course. I believe the details matter. And so I’m not going to just ask you broad generalities on the exam. I can ask you the details. It’s a little bit like teaching a language, right? Learning a language is really important, and you’ve got to learn all the words, right? There’s thousands of them. It’s like that. You’re going to be learning the words of finance.So, I have another book also, which is actually not done yet, but you can access it through Classes*v2, and later it will come out as a published book. But I’m working on a book called–well, I don’t know what it will be called finally. When you’re writing a book, one thing you learn as an author is you can never be sure what the title of the book will be. Because if somebody else uses the same title and you’re done, somebody else gets to it first, you’ve got to change your title.But at this moment the title of my book is “Finance and the Good Society.” I’m not sure when it will be out. I was hoping next year, but now I’m thinking it might take longer than that. So, you have something that’s imperfect. I hope you’ll excuse me when you look at the chapters of this book. You don’t have quite all the chapters either. But I just thought it was a good thing to put it in process for you to–maybe if you have ideas you can tell me and the book will change with your input. To me it’s a good way to write a book, is to be writing a book and teaching a class at the same time on the same topic. It’s more social. You know, you just sit in your office and write and you end up feeling sterile. So, this makes it more alive to me to do that at the same time.But I’ll tell you what my book is about. The title that I now have, “Finance and the Good Society,” may sound to some people like an oxymoron because they’re kind of incompatible. People are angry about finance these days. We’ve had–and this is going to be an important part of this course–we’ve had the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression of the 1930s. And it’s been a worldwide financial crisis and it isn’t over yet, or it’s not clear that it’s over yet. And people are angry. People are angry about finance, people who seem to be getting rich often it seems at the expense of others. Or they seem to be lobbying their governments to give them breaks and bailouts, and they walk home with billions of dollars. Something seems immoral and wrong. Well, I’m sure some immoral things are happening, but I don’t think that finance, as a whole, is wrong. And I think of it as a noble profession. So I wanted to try to put it in perspective. And it’s especially important when talking to young people like yourselves because you’re launching out on a career, and I want that to be a moral and purposeful career. And I want to put finance in the perspective.So, the theme that I want to develop in my book is that part–you know, we live in a capitalist world now and this world is increasingly built on finance. Some people call it we’re living in the era of financial capitalism. We have these big multinational institutions that are owned by huge numbers, maybe millions, of shareholders dispersed all over the world. And what makes the whole thing work and click? It’s the financial arrangements. The world is discovering the importance of finance.When I go to a foreign country and give a talk, I find that people–it doesn’t matter what country–they’re generally very interested in finance, because they think that our modern financial techniques are part of what’s making so many places in the world grow at rapid rates now. We’re living in a time in history when  developing world is exploding with growth, and these countries that are doing that are countries that are adopting modern finance. So, I want this to go right, and I want this to be developing a good society. By good society, I mean a just and fair society that allows people to develop their talents and expertise.So, another thought I had was that the field of finance– let me give you another slide. I said I view this course as one of the most important courses in Yale College, at least from a standpoint of your lives and careers. I wanted to compare finance jobs with jobs. And I don’t mean to put down other departments, but at least vocationally, let’s put this in perspective. I wanted to compare jobs in finance with jobs in other fields. So, this is a chart that I constructed using data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. And what it has is the number of people in various occupations in 2008 and their projections for the same in 2018. So, the red bar is for 2018, and we’ll emphasize that because you’ll be just getting into your careers when that comes.So, it says, if you look at financial analysts in the United States there’s almost 300,000. Financial managers, it’s over half a million. Personal financial advisers, a quarter of a million, all right? These are people who specialize entirely in one form of finance or another. But compare that with economists. Look at that. What is that? About 20,000? I think they’re excluding professors. But, you know, just economists out there–not very many. How about astronomers? OK. I can’t even read that. I love astronomy by the way, but I think I made the right choice when I decided–well, I shouldn’t say that, you never know. We all have to do something different. And you could become an astronomer, but there aren’t many jobs in astronomy. Sociologists, political scientists, just not many compared to–this is just enormously bigger. Or mathematicians.I also put one oddball field on here: massage therapists, OK? The number of massage therapist jobs outnumbers any of those other fields by, what is it, 100:1. So this is the kind of disappointment that people face. You go to the college or university–this is very much on my mind–you go to the university and you develop special skills, and you leave and then you end up driving a taxi. That doesn’t mean that I want to become vocational. I mean, I don’t want to just train you for a job, but I want to be relevant. And it seems to me that I can be relevant in talking about finance. And so that’s the basic core that I wanted to get.I mentioned before that people think that finance is the field for people who want to get rich, who want to make a lot of money. Well, I think that’s right, actually.I don’t advise you to take that as your–but I wanted to talk about that a little bit. So, one thing that you’ll note, Forbes Magazine has an annual list of the 400 richest people in America. So, I looked at that list. Who do you think they are? Most of you probably have not read this list. You might think that, well, who makes a lot of money? Well, it’s athletes. Football players, right? Baseball players. And who else? Oh, movie stars, right? They make a lot of money. So how many do you think of those are on the Forbes 400 of the richest people in America?Well, as I read the list I didn’t see a single movie star or a single athlete. There is–it depends on how you define it. Oprah Winfrey is on the list. OK? You’ve heard of her. She’s in the entertainment business. But you know, she’s also a finance person. She runs big businesses. She’s into making things happen. And I can assure you that she knows finance, at least some basic finance. You see, finance gets you to build organizations. That’s how it’s done. And it means raising capital to make things happen on a big scale. You know, no athlete is as powerful as one of these random guys on the Forbes 400 list.It’s interesting. I looked down the list and I didn’t spot a single Nobel Prize winner. Maybe I missed one. I looked for best selling authors. I found one: Bill Gates, who wrote a book called The Road Ahead. But there are not many best selling authors either. What do they have in common? Now about a third of them just inherited it from their parents, but most of them did it themselves. They just made huge sums of money. And what do they do? Well, they’re typically in some boring line of business. They make something, but they’re doing it on a vast scale. And so that means they’re making deals, they’re putting things together, they’re buying companies, they’re absorbing other companies into theirs. There’s something powerful about an ability to do that. And I think that it’s good for you to understand and appreciate that.By the way, Forbes has another list called the Forbes Celebrity 100. And to be on that list, you have to be a celebrity. It’s a completely different list. Oprah is on both lists, but she’s practically the only one. Steven Spielberg is on both lists, I think. He makes movies, but he has a whole company called DreamWorks, and he finances all kinds of movies, so he’s a businessperson as well. So I don’t think of finance as a mathematical–I mean it is mathematical, it has a core element of that. But to me, it’s about making things happen and about putting together deals and getting people incentivized to do something, and getting capital, getting resources in a massive scale so that something can happen. And so that’s what this course is about. Oh, Jerry Seinfeld is listed by Forbes as a possibility–he’s about the only one–to make the list of the Forbes 400. But he isn’t there yet.I don’t mean to diminish these celebrity people, but there’s something else that goes on in finance, and it’s quiet. It’s behind the–actually, most of the Forbes 400 you’ve never heard of. They’re kind of behind the scenes doing things that are big and important, but they don’t get on the news so much. It’s one of the ironies of life. You might aspire to do this, to get on the Forbes 400. You can do it and still nobody knows who you are or cares. So that’s just as well, I think, for many people.So then the question is: Suppose you get on the Forbes 400, what are you going to do with it? In other words, to get on the Forbes 400 you have to have made at least a billion dollars. So that means, you have in your own portfolio a thousand million dollars. That’s the minimum to make the list. So what are you going to do with a thousand million? Any ideas, what would you do with it? You could buy cars, right? How many sports cars could you buy for that? What could you do? You could buy 20 houses. But that doesn’t begin–you could buy 20 houses and so what? You know, you still have 900 million leftover. So what are you going to do with all that money? And that’s a question.Now, some people who do that, who make all this money, try to see if they can maximize their appearance of wealth. They try to show to the world how rich they are. So, you just build the biggest mansion and you do something really spectacular. But when you got a billion dollars, there isn’t a house in the country you could buy for a billion dollars. You can only stay in one at a time, right? So, what are you going to do? But there are people who do that, and I think that there’s a history of disgust for those people, a long history.We don’t like people who do that. It’s almost like it’s a big mistake. Why would you do that when people don’t like people who show off their wealth? There’s evidence that people feel that way in many different countries and cultures, because lots of countries in history have what are called sumptuary laws. It goes back at least to 700 BC in Ancient Greece with the Locrian code. These are laws prohibiting people from conspicuous consumption. And they’ve been in so many different countries that I think it’s evidence that something is amiss with making wealth as the objective of your life.So, one of the themes in the beginning of our reading list is–I think there’s a movement afoot today around the world of thinking about this problem, that you can get so big and powerful if you build a business and you use the financial techniques that are successful for other people, but it’s meaningless unless you give it away. And so, what else can you do with all this wealth but plan to give it away.So, one thing I have on the reading list right at the beginning is a chapter from a book–well, the title of the book is The Gospel of Wealth and Other Essays and it was written by Andrew Carnegie. Actually, he wrote a short article in a magazine called “Wealth” in 1889. And in the final paragraph he used the term “gospel of wealth” and it was picked up all over the world as just outrageous. And so it became named The Gospel of Wealth. So, later in the early 20th century he came out with a book entitled The Gospel of Wealth. And that’s what I have assigned. You can click on it on the reading list. And Andrew Carnegie was one of these–they didn’t have Forbes 400, but he was one of the richest men in America through his Carnegie Steel Company, very much steeped in finance.But he decided when he wrote his essay, The Gospel of Wealth, in 1889 that once a person reaches middle age, like 50 or 55, and has made a lot of money, they really have to go into philanthropy. There’s a moral imperative. So the theme of The Gospel of Wealth was some people are just better at what he called affairs than other people. That means business. Some people have a sense of how to make things happen. These people have a moral obligation to make this work for the benefit of humankind. And that means, while they’re still young, they have to take their fortune and give it all away before they die. Because if they don’t give it all away, it’s nonsense. If you make a billion dollars and you leave it to your children, chances are they’re not like you. They’re not going to be interested in working hard and making things happen. They’re just going to squander it. And so that’s what the moral obligation is. You have to stop at age, let’s say 55–OK, you still got time left–and then use your same talents.So, it was almost a theory of capitalism–it is a theory of capitalism. It is a theory that some people are just more practical and hardworking and business-oriented, and these people can find things to do that benefit mankind, and they should do it. So, there’s a natural selection. This is Carnegie. I’m not endorsing this entirely. I think there’s an element of truth to The Gospel of Wealth, but it’s not exactly true. But the element of truth is right, that people like Carnegie who was a very gifted person–you know what he did? He set up the Carnegie Institute of Technology, now called Carnegie Mellon University. He set up the Carnegie Endowment for World Peace, Carnegie Hall in New York. He probably gave something to Yale, too. Anyone know? Is there a Carnegie? He gave to like every imaginable university. I know at Princeton they have a Lake Carnegie. He was visiting Princeton and someone pointed out this kind of swampy land and said we’d like to really create a lake. So he said, fine. He gave them money to create Lake Carnegie. And he also gave the money for the prize for the first true competition on Lake Carnegie. So, he just had all kinds of gifts he gave it away.I also have–it’s interesting, I found this on the web. Thomas Edison, the inventor, was so impressed with Carnegie’s The Gospel of Wealth that Edison was developing the sound movie, I think it was 1914, but he didn’t perfect it. But he said the first sound movie should involve geniuses of our time. So, he made a sound movie of Carnegie reading from his The Gospel of Wealth. Unfortunately, the visual side of it somehow got lost. Maybe it didn’t work. We only have the soundtrack from the movie. So, you can listen to Carnegie reading from this book in 1914, and it’s the only recording of Carnegie’s voice that survived.Since then, Bill Gates and Warren Buffett and others of the Forbes 400 have done a campaign to get billionaires around the world to commit to give most of their wealth away, while they’re still alive. And I’m trying to get one of these people to speak to our class, but I haven’t yet arranged that.I also have on the website a review from 1890 of Carnegie’s original essay from a California newspaper, and they were so negative about it. They said, Carnegie thinks that making wealth and giving it away is a noble cause. That cannot possibly be right. These people who make money are not the most enlightened and smart people in our world. I think that the truth lies somewhere in between. But we do have a society now where people–we have an increasing concentration of wealth at the top, and I don’t know what we’re going to do about this. This is a trend that may continue.And so, this is the thing I want to think about in this course. I don’t think finance necessarily does this. It may be a bubble, that there is currently a bubble in financial careers and that you are going to be disappointed because 20 or 30 years from now if you go into a finance-related field, you’ll find that it’s not as lucrative as you hoped. That kind of happens, right? When a field becomes known for having a lot of successful people, then more young people go into it and they swamp the field. On the other hand, I think that it will always be true that just because of the power of the technology the top wealthiest people in the world will be finance-related. And I think that they will have a moral obligation to give their wealth away in a productive way.So, I have several outside speakers, and I tried to bring in people that are connected to the world in a positive way. I’m trying to bring in inspirations for you as outside speakers. And they’re people who are in finance but who are not selfish. They may be rich but they are good people.So, the first person that I’m going to bring in, as I’ve done in previous years, is David Swensen, who is Chief Investment Officer for Yale University. Swensen also teaches a course, Economics 450, with Dean Takahashi, which you might want to take. But I have him here just for one lecture. And what Swensen has done is turn the Yale endowment into a huge number. He came to Yale in 1985, and at that time, Yale had less than $1 billion in its endowment.Swensen is the most successful university endowment manager of the United States. He turned less than $1 billion into $22.9 in 2008. The financial crisis hit and the endowment fell, but as of June of 2010, it was still 16.7 billion. So, he has done so much to make Yale a success. But it matters. That’s a lot of money. And it’s all for a good cause. Now I say, I believe Swensen is a good person. I think he turned down opportunities to make much more on Wall Street, because he is known–and he’s continually turning them down–as an investment genius. He can command huge salaries and bonuses if he wanted to, but he stays here with Yale. I don’t think that people in finance are money-grubbers, and this is an example of someone who’s not.The second speaker I have is Maurice “Hank” Greenberg, who founded AIG. It started out in 1962. In 1962, he was put in charge of North American operations of the American International Group, an insurance company, which was then failing. The head of the company, C.V. Starr, put him in this to try to turn the company around. He turned it, over many years as CEO of AIG, into the biggest insurance company in the world, and he ran it until 2005.The company–have you heard of this, AIG? You must have heard of this. In the recent financial crisis it has encountered some problems. And, in fact, it was the biggest bailout of all. It was bailed out by the U.S. government. And there’s a scandal about that because the bailout was so huge. It was in the hundreds of billions. Record-setting bailout. And some people are angry with Greenberg. But I think that’s completely unfair, because it all happened after he left AIG. And the problems were in a particular unit within AIG that he was not really responsible for.But Greenberg is a person who has, I think, a moral purpose that I want to illustrate for you. He’s been criticized. Anyone who does business on that scale is going to be criticized for being too tough or too aggressive at times. But he’s a very involved person. He’s the Vice Chairman for the Council on Foreign Relations, which is a think tank that thinks about the United States and its place in the world. It’s a very important think tank. He’s also a major philanthropist and he’s given to Yale. Notably, he gave the Greenberg Center, which is right next to the Center for Globalization. A beautiful new building. So he has agreed to come. I’m very pleased to have him.The third outside speaker that I have now is Laura Cha, although she won’t be here in person. We’re going to have her image up on the screen because she is in Hong Kong. And she is a non-official member of the Executive Council of Hong Kong. She’s a member of the government of the People’s Republic of China at the vice-ministerial rank. She’s the first non-Chinese delegate to the National People’s Congress representing Hong Kong, and has been vice chair of the China Securities Regulatory Commission. So she is very involved in finance. She’s also been affiliated with Yale and helped some of our initiatives. She’ll have to get up very late at night, I think, to be on for 9:00 in the morning for us from Hong Kong. I might get one or two other speakers, but that’s where it stands right now.So, I wanted also to tell you about our teaching assistants. We have four teaching assistants now. We might get another, but at this point. The first is Oliver Bunn who is from Germany, University of Bonn, and is a PhD student in economics. He’s also our head TA who coordinates the whole operation.And then we have–the second one is Elan Fuld from the United States. And he’s doing an interesting study of the pizza delivery industry. It sounds funny, but it’s an interesting application of economic theory to very much the real world.Bige Kahraman is from Bilkent University in Turkey, and she’s interested in Behavioral Finance. That means–I should have said this. It’s also an interest of this course. I’ve skipped by it in my notes. Behavioral Finance is the application of psychology, sociology, and other social sciences to finance. I don’t know how I omitted mentioning that. It’s about people in finance–well, I didn’t really completely omit mentioning it. You’ve got the sense that I’m interested in people. But there’s been a revolution in finance over the last 20 years. Twenty years ago, finance was thought of in academia as an essentially mathematical discipline, that and nothing more. Well, maybe I’m exaggerating a little bit. But what’s happened since then is people think of finance as involving psychology. We have to bring people with knowledge of human beings in.And so, her dissertation topic, a major theme of it, is how mutual funds operate. Mutual funds are companies that offer investment vehicles to the general public, and she finds that the mutual fund companies have complicated fee schedules and they offer different choices to people. And what sense does this make? Why are there all these different choices? You look at the fee schedules and you think–it’s just like your cell phone plan, right? It’s got different choices and you don’t know which one I should take. Why are they doing all this? Well, she tries to analyze what’s going on and she finds that sometimes it seems like clients are steered toward a fee schedule that’s really not in their interest and that the mutual fund managers are doing some things that maybe we don’t want them to do. Maybe it’s not ideal. They’re pushed by competitive pressures into offering products that are a little bit manipulative of people.And her dissertation also brings up another theme, which I thought I perhaps should have emphasized, that all is not well in the financial world. Lots of bad things happen. Or not necessarily awful things, but, you know, not socially conscious things. And that’s why we need regulators. That’s another reason why I brought in Laura Cha, by the way. She’s a regulator. I wanted to have a voice from that side, because I personally admire regulators and think that they have a very important function in our society. So, her work fits more into that regulatory side of finance.And then, finally, our fourth teaching assistant is Bin Li from Beijing, although he went to college at University College London. And he has broad interests including Leveraged Asset Pricing and also Behavioral Finance. So, those are the teaching assistants.So, let me just give a brief outline of the course. There are 20 lectures that I’m giving in this course. This is the first. Let me just go through what’s the content of these lectures.So, Lecture 2, that would be on Wednesday of this week, I want to talk about the core concept of risk and also about financial crises. The one reason why I wanted to update this course with Open Yale this year is because I wanted to talk about the financial crisis that we’ve been through, though I thought this lecture would start with something about the theory of probability, but I’m not going to get into that very much. That will be more for a TA section that will come in later.But even so, this is not a probability course. I just want to kind of remind you of the concepts of probability. And there’s a concept of independent risks. If risks are independent you can diversify away them, and you can put together a portfolio that minimizes the risks. The law of large numbers says if you have a lot of independent risks, they’ll average out if you have a large number of these different risks in your portfolio and there’s no risk left. That’s if they’re independent. But in fact, risks are not as independent as you think, and that’s one reason why we had a financial crisis. And so a lot of people were making plans based on portfolio theory in finance, but the plans assumed that there won’t be a crisis, that maybe one of our investments will go bad, but they can’t all go bad or a large number of them can’t go bad. So, that was a failure of the independence assumption in finance.That failure created the financial crisis that we’ve been through. It was a near miss onto another Great Depression. The financial crisis that began in 1929–I’ll talk about that briefly in that lecture–started with the stock market crash of 1929 and the economy spiraled down until 1933. It just kept getting worse and worse. More and more bankruptcies, more and more layoffs. So, by 1933, 25% of the U.S. population was unemployed. And it wasn’t just the U.S., it was all over the world. It was a horrible crisis. And we didn’t get over that crisis until World War II. It’s like we couldn’t get out of it. The crisis got so bad that nobody in the world could figure out what to do. And I think that part of the reason we had World War II was because of the anxieties and animosities caused by this massive unemployment. But we got out of it because World War II created a huge stimulus program. I mean, they drafted all the unemployed and made them fight. What an awful outcome, but that’s what happened. It’s terrible.And so this time we saw the beginnings of a similar crisis. We saw crashes in the stock market and the real estate market, we saw bankruptcies appearing, we saw runs on banks. And this time the Government decided on a controversial bailout package. And so, Ben Bernanke and Mervyn King and other central bankers and government policymakers around the world had the idea that we can’t let it happen the same way this time. So, there was massive bailouts, controversial bailouts, because they seemed to be unfair to many people. So, it’s a huge and interesting story.I’ve written three books, by the way, about this crisis. Well, two of them with co-authors. So, it’s something that fascinates me. But I don’t want to dwell on it too much in this course, because I’m hopeful that it will heal itself and we can put it behind us.And the financial crisis doesn’t call into question the basic principles of finance. Not in my mind. The vulnerability to a crash that we see in financial markets is like the same thing as the vulnerability to crash of airplanes. Airplanes crash from time to time. You must know that when you get on one. But that doesn’t mean we shouldn’t have airplanes. And I think the financial system is advancing in the world with such speed and such impressiveness that this crisis is just a blip on the screen of that, and not something I think we should worry too much about.The third lecture is about technology and invention in finance. Finance is a technology just like engineering or mechanical engineering. It has principles, it has techniques, and it involves inventing of details. That is, financial institutions are complicated. They’re complicated in the same way automobiles or airplanes or nuclear power reactors are. You can see this complexity if you read some of the documents that are associated with the modern corporation. There’s a lot there. And the way the cash flows are divided up among different people, involving options and derivatives and other complicated financial instruments, are part of the technology. And this technology is advancing, and it will advance a lot over the time of your career.I don’t have an ability to predict the future with any accuracy, but I want to try to think about what we can say about the future. I wrote a book in 2003 called The New Financial Order, and it was my take on the future. But the problem is nobody really knows the future very well. You kind of have to just invent it or dream about what it might be like. That’s what I did. I kind of thought about principles of financial theory and where they might go with the advance of information technology and the globalization of the world. So, I have just a chapter from that for that section of the course.Then, Lecture 4 is about portfolio diversification, how risks are spread. And we’ll talk briefly about the Capital Asset Pricing Model. Now again, the Capital Asset Pricing Model is a mathematical theory of diversification. A very important theory, and it’s something that John Geanakoplos will cover with more rigor in Econ 251 that I already mentioned. But for me, I will talk briefly about the capital asset pricing model, and one of our teaching assistants will give a section on it. But I want to also think about, since this is a course about the real world, I want to think about financial institutions, and so many of our institutions are offering diversification one way or another. And so, again, I wanted to talk about the real world component of this.The fifth lecture is about insurance. And the insurance industry developed over the centuries. It goes, actually, all the way back to Ancient Rome, but only minimally. People didn’t have the concepts until the 1600s when probability theory was invented. There was an intuitive concept that, sure, I could start an insurance company, I could put together a lot of insurance policies and charge for them, and probably I won’t–you just have intuitive sense about law of large number or independence of risks. Probably, I’ll be OK and I can make good on the policies I wrote. But it was never clear until probability theory was developed. Since then, it’s been growing and it’s becoming a bigger and bigger part of our lives. And I think that insurance is actually a lifesaver.I’ll give you one example. You note that in the earthquake in Haiti–what was that, about a year ago? There was a tremendous loss of life, but the earthquake in San Francisco decades earlier was of the same magnitude and had very little loss of life. Also, the loss suffered by people in terms of destruction of their homes and their office buildings was vastly higher in Haiti. Well, it turns out that Haiti, a less developed country, didn’t have much of the modern insurance industry, so that people were uninsured against risk of collapse of their structure and you didn’t have insurance industries going in and policing building codes. If the insurance company is liable to the risk then they go in and say, we won’t insure you unless you fix this. Since it didn’t happen, so many people died.I think that Haiti will come along. There is already a Caribbean insurance initiative that was starting. We want to see the developing world get these institutions. I want to try to give a sense of the reality of that, that we tend to think of Haiti as an opportunity for our charity, and a lot of us gave money to help these people. But, you know, charity doesn’t work on a big enough scale. Going around to people on the street and asking them to give money to help the Haitian earthquake victims, it doesn’t amount to a lot. What really becomes big and important is the insurance industry, which is doing the same thing as a business model. And that’s the real world and it matters enormously.The sixth lecture is about efficient markets. This is about a theory that developed in the 1960s, that financial markets are wonderfully perfect. I’m saying I’m a little bit skeptical of this theory, although I think it has an element of truth. Efficient Markets Theory is the idea that you really can’t make money by trading in financial markets because the markets are so competitive that the price is always pushed to an optimal level that incorporates all information that anyone could ever have about the security. And the theory has been that it’s hopeless to try to invest and beat the market. Well, I think there’s an element of truth to that but it’s not quite true, and people like David Swensen are counterexamples, that it is possible for professional money managers to beat the market. And that’s something I want to think about and talk about in that lecture.Lecture 7 is about debt markets. We have a lot of money that’s lent. The Federal Reserve manages these markets. It tries to coordinate the markets through open market operations and through what now is called Quantitative Easing. But the markets are huge and international. They involve errors that people make. A lot of people get overly indebted and make mistakes over their lives. But they also offer opportunities, that debt markets are fundamental to the things we want to do in our lives. For example, when you are a little bit older, many of you will want to buy a house, right? But you won’t be in that point in the life cycle when you have the money to buy a house, most of you, so you’ll be borrowing. It’s elementary. You take out a mortgage. That seems obvious. But still today in many countries of the world, the mortgage market is not very developed, and you can’t do that. So, there’s a good side to borrowing as well as a bad side. I want to put it in perspective. We’ve got our review session. We’ll talk a little bit, somewhat, with one of our teaching assistants about the mathematics of debt.Lecture 8 will be about the stock market. Again, I think of the stock market not as something that we’re going to beat. I think it’s something that is an invention to motivate people to get people working together. So, the basic idea of a stock investment: You and your friends want to set up a company, OK? How do you do that? Well, the company needs money to start. So, somebody’s got to contribute capital. Well, some of you have more money to contribute than others, so you should have a bigger share in the company. Some of you have no money at all to contribute, but you’re going to contribute your time and energy. So, you want to give a share in the company to these other people as well in order to incentivize them.So, you devise a whole scheme to set up a company that involves the creation of stock. And then you start trading the stock and then it gets all the more interesting. And then there are options on these stock certificates. But it’s all for a purpose. The purpose is to make some enterprise happen. And it really is important that we have these institutions, and if you don’t have them, your little group trying to do something is going to fall apart. Someone’s going to get angry and leave. It’s just not going to work. And so I think of the stock market as doing these functions. Now I know Karl Marx said he thought it was a big casino, but we’re not communists here. This is about modern finance.Lecture 9 is about real estate–another fascination for me. I’ve been working for years about real estate. And, in fact, with my colleague Karl Case, we have our own home price indices called the Standard and Poor Case-Shiller Home Price Indices. We’ll talk about those. But it’s really important for this crisis that we’ve just seen, because the financial crisis was caused substantially by a bubble in home prices, I believe, a psychologically induced excitement or euphoria about home prices in the United States and in other countries that collapsed around 2006. These bubbles are restarting in other parts of the world more recently. And the real estate market is getting very speculative and psychological, I believe. And the outlook right now for the economy hinges on how these markets behave. So, that will be, I think, an important lecture for this course.Lecture 10 is about Behavioral Finance. It’s about psychology in finance. I talked about that. It’s another long-standing interest of mine to try to incorporate psychology into our theory.So, lecture 12 is about banking, multiple expansion of credit, the money multiplier, and bank regulation, which is something that is a fascinating topic because we almost lost our banking system. We had to bail them out massively. We have international accords now. Notably, a new one just came out called Basel III from Basel, which is the city in Switzerland, and it was endorsed by the G-20 countries at their Korean meeting in Seoul. So, we’re seeing a change in bank regulation that will, we hope, prevent another crisis like the one we just went through.Lecture 13 is about forwards and futures markets. Forward markets are markets for contracts that deliver in the future. Over-the-counter contracts, they’re called, that are done one-on-one between parties with the help of an investment bank. Or futures contracts, which are traded on organized futures exchanges, like the Chicago Mercantile Exchange. I have some involvement with this because we worked with the Chicago Mercantile Exchange to create a futures market for single-family homes using the S&amp;P Case-Shiller Index. So, I’m involved in this. And we have that market functioning at a rather low level, but it is functioning and it seems to be growing lately. I’m hopeful for that market.Lecture 14 is about options markets. These are most typically stock options, which are contracts that allow you to purchase a share of a stock or to sell a share at a pre-specified price. These are traded on options exchanges. They have a price that goes up and down. This is an example of a derivative contract that injects a lot of complexity into financial theory.Lecture 15 is about monetary policy. It’s about the central banks of the world. For example, our central bank, called the Federal Reserve in the United States. And it’s about what they do and how they help prevent crises like the one we’ve just seen. They did help prevent it. I think they staved off disaster.Lecture 16 is about investment banking. I know this is of great interest because we place a lot of students in good jobs in investment banking. Companies like Goldman Sachs, the most talked about one. Investment bankers help companies raise capital, issue securities, retire securities. And we’re going to talk about how they’re regulated. And I didn’t mention Dodd-Frank, by the way, but we have a new bill that just passed in July in the United States that changes the regulatory structure for investment banks and a whole array of financial institutions. And I want to talk about that.The European Parliament has created a number of new laws and organizations that somewhat resemble Dodd-Frank. And other countries have also done financial regulation reform that affects investment banking and other aspects of finance. It’s extremely complicated. I don’t want to give you too many details but I want to give you some sense of the revolution that we’re seeing.Lecture 17 is about professional money managers like David Swensen, people who manage portfolios. You don’t have to be a billionaire to manage a billion-dollar portfolio. In fact, some of you may be doing it sooner than you realize if you get the right kind of job. Managing a portfolio means managing the risks, putting them in the right places. You think of institutional investors, big money managers, as just trying to make money. But when you get into that field you realize that you have power as an institutional investor. When you own a big share of some company, you can go to the board meeting and talk to these people, or the stockholders’ meeting, and you will get heard if you own 10% of the shares of a company. Then you suddenly realize that you are a steward of the public interest. And I think institutional investors are recognizing that more and more.Lecture 18 is about exchanges, brokers, dealers, clearinghouses, like the New York Stock Exchange or the London Stock Exchange. They are proliferating around the world. Whereas there were just a few 30 years ago, now almost every country has a stock exchange and a complicated list of exchanges. They’re increasingly electronic; they have interesting new features, like microsecond trading that’s going on, computers trading with other computers. We’ll talk about where this is going.Lecture 19 is about public and nonprofit finance. So, I think this is very important. Nonprofit finance would include organizations like Yale University, or churches and charities and other things like that. But I’m also including in this lecture public finance. And that means governments financing projects. So, for example, you take it for granted that our city here of New Haven has roads, it has schools, it has sewers, it has water. All this kind of comes without you even asking. But all of these things had to be financed. And the City of New Haven, like other cities, is issuing debt and it’s a complicated business. I want to get you into some of the details because it matters, because this is how you make things happen. You can go to your city government and you can propose that they issue revenue bonds to start some new product. You would know–that’s what I want you to do, is to know how these things are done so that it’s not just imagination, you can make it happen. And also nonprofits. I want you to understand that you can set up your own nonprofits, and there’s a lot of advantages to doing that. That’s an organization that has a financial structure but no shareholders. Nobody takes home the money. It all goes to some cause.And, finally, my last lecture, Lecture 20, I’m calling it ”Finding your Purpose in Finance.” I just want to come back in the last lecture to the idea that this is a course not about making money. I don’t want you to give a billion dollars to your children and grandchildren, which they will then squander in conspicuous consumption. The idea is a moral purpose. And that’s one thing I wanted to try to convey, partly with outside speakers, maybe with other examples that I can give, that I think that many people who are wealthy and who have succeeded in finance really don’t care about spending the money on themselves. They really do have a purpose. And even if that’s not true of many of them.There’s an interesting book by Robert Frank, I don’t have it on the reading list, called Richistan, who talks about what wealthy people are like these days. And if you read his book sometimes they are disgustingly rich and spending the money on silly things. But there is an idea among many of them that they are going to do their good things for the world. I think many of you will do these things; I want to think about the purpose that you’ll find in finance.So, that’s just the closing thought. I’ll see you again on Wednesday. But the closing thought is that this is about making your purposes happen. OK.Professor John Geanakoplos: So anyway, the course I’m going to teach is called Financial Theory. I’m going to teach an actual class. I’m going to spend the first half of the class talking about the course and why you might be interested in it, and then I’m going to start with the course. There are not that many lectures available in the semester so I’m not going to waste this one. So the first half of the class is going to be about why to study it and the mechanics of the course, and the second half of the lecture is going to be actually the first part of the course. It’ll give you maybe an idea of whether you’ll find the course interesting too.So I think I’ll turn this–I won’t have too much PowerPoint here. So you should know that finance was not taught until ten years ago at Yale. It was regarded by the deans and the classically minded faculty of the arts and sciences as a vocational subject not worthy of being taught to Yale undergraduates.It was growing more and more famous, however, in the world and there was a band of business school professors, Fischer Black, Robert Merton, William Sharpe, Steve Ross, Myron Scholes, Merton Miller, who had a huge following in business schools teaching the subject, and whose students went off to Wall Street, and more or less dominated the investment banking parts of Wall Street, and became extremely successful. Finance became the most highly paid profession. It became the most highly paid faculty in the university, although they were all in business schools. There are more physics PhDs working in finance now than there are working in physics.So this merry band of financial theory professors didn’t really believe in regulation. They believed markets left unfettered worked best of all. They believed in what they called efficient markets and the idea that asset prices reflect all the available possible information. So an implication of that is that if you want to find out whether a company’s doing well or not you don’t have to take the trouble to read all their financial reports, just look at their stock price. If you wanted to know whether a country’s doing well or not you don’t have to study its entire political system and current events, just look at the general stock market of the country and that’ll tell you.They believed that you could make as good returns in the market as a lay person as you could as an expert because all the experts were competing to try and get the best possible price, and so the price itself reflected all their knowledge and wisdom and opinions and so the lay person could take advantage of that by buying stocks. Everybody should be an investor, they felt. A monkey throwing darts at a dart board would do as well as any of the greatest experts.Now, their own theory was basically contradicted by their own experience because all of them seemed to go out into the world and invest, and almost all of them made extraordinary returns and made a huge amount of money all of which made them even less popular in the faculty of arts and sciences.So, a critical part of their theory was that the markets were so efficient, driven by people like them who are competing to exploit every advantage, and therefore compete away every advantage, and by doing that put all the information they have into the prices. The implication of that theory is that there’s an extraordinarily clever way of computing the value of most investment assets, and about deciding when a financial decision’s a good thing to do or not, and that was the heart of what they taught in these business schools, these algorithms for valuing assets and making optimal financial decisions. One striking thing is that the people they studied, the business people and the investment bankers they studied adopted their language. So this had never happened in academia before. I mean, anthropologists study primitive tribes and different kinds of people all the time and not one of them, I venture to say, has ever taken over all the language invented by anthropologists to behave themselves in their own societies, but the business people that these professors were studying ended up using exactly the language created in academia.Now, Yale was very different. There was no divide between economists and finance people, the business school finance people. At Yale the greatest economists in Yale’s history were actually very interested in finance. Maybe they were financial economists to begin with. So the greatest Yale economist of the first half of the twentieth century was Irving Fisher who you hear a lot about. He wrote, possibly, the first economics PhD at Yale. There was no economist to teach him so he had to write his PhD with Gibbs, maybe the greatest American physicist of the time. There’s a building, as you know, on Science Hill named after Gibbs, and you’ll hear more about his dissertation in the 1890s, but he was a mathematical economist, an econometrician but he invented almost all of this economics in order to study finance.The most famous Yale economist of the second half of the twentieth century was James Tobin, a famous macroeconomist, the most famous macroeconomist, possibly, of the second half of the twentieth century after Keynes, a great Keynesian. But he got the Nobel Prize for work he did on finance in economics. Finance was incredibly interesting to him. So Bob Shiller and I went to Yale and we basically said to the deans, “There’s a long tradition of finance and economics hand-in-hand at Yale, and so it’s not a vocational subject. It’s actually central to economics, and central to understanding the economy, and central to understanding the global economy. So we’d like to teach it to Yale undergraduates, and we believe a few of them will actually take the course,” and so they agreed to let us do it, and so we’ve been teaching it now for the last ten years.So as you know Shiller has been very critical of the business efficient markets tradition. He feels that these finance professors left something essential out of the whole story. What they left out was psychology. They left out the idea of fads, and rumors, and narratives, which he thinks has as big an effect on prices as the hard information about profits that the business school professors imagined drove profits.I myself have been quite critical of the financial theory. I started off as a straight pure mathematical economist. To me economics was almost a branch of logic and philosophy that happened to tell you something about the world. So I got my PhD with Ken Arrow, who you’ll hear a lot about very shortly. And I came to Yale, I’d been a Yale undergraduate, I came back to Yale and I joined the Cowles Foundation. And the Cowles Foundation’s motto was basically, “Can we make economics more mathematical? Economics, a social science, ought to be amenable to mathematical analysis just like physics or chemistry is,” and people didn’t believe this at first. And the Cowles Foundation, which you’ll hear a lot about in these lectures, led the revolution in economics transforming it from a verbal subject, political economy, into a mathematical subject.Well, I decided around 1989 that since I did mathematical economics, and there were all these finance people doing all kinds of mathematical things on Wall Street and doing it very successfully, I thought I might just check out what they were doing. So it might be fun to see what they were up to. So I went to Wall Street and I joined–most people I knew, in fact, professors I knew went to Goldman Sachs. There was a famous finance professor, who I had mentioned before, named Fischer Black who was there at the time and he attracted a lot of people. And so that was the traditional thing to do, but I decided to go to a littler firm called Kidder Peabody, and it was the seventh biggest investment bank at the time. And one thing led to another, and they decided that they wanted to reorganize their research department in fixed income. And since I was a professor there, and I did mathematical economics, and I was there for the whole year somebody said, the director of the Fixed Income Department said, “Why don’t you take charge of it and hire a new Fixed Income Research Department for me. So I did, and ultimately there were seventy-five people in the department.All the time I was a professor at Yale. And after five years Kidder Peabody, even though it was a hundred thirty-five years old, formed by a famous family, the name should sound–Peabody–familiar to you, it closed down after a hundred thirty-five years, five years after I got there. I had to invite the seventy-five people I’d hired into my office and say, “You’re fired.” And then I went next door to the office next to mine and the guy there said, “You’re fired.” And so that was my first taste of Wall Street. And after that six of us founded a hedge fund called Ellington Capital Management, which was a mortgage hedge fund, and we had–I’ll tell you a lot about it. It started after the Kidder closing as a rather small hedge fund, but it grew into a very big mortgage hedge fund, in fact the biggest mortgage hedge fund in the country. (Although recently we found out that practically everybody who trades mortgages is basically a hedge fund. Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, they’ll all basically hedge funds, so it doesn’t mean anything anymore to say that you’re a big mortgage hedge fund.) But anyway, we almost went out of business in ‘98 a subject, a story I’ll tell you at great length, and then we just suffered through this disastrous last year or two, but we’re still here. So these experiences, of course, have colored my understanding of Wall Street and my approach to the subject.So I took on, in my theoretical work, finance and economic theory on its own terms. I didn’t think like Shiller to introduce psychology into economics I just take it on in its own terms, in its own mathematical terms. And what I found was that there are two things missing in the Standard Theory. One is that it implicitly assumes you can buy insurance for everything. It’s the assumption that’s called complete markets. And secondly it leaves out collateral entirely so you’ll never see, almost in any single economics textbook, the idea of collateral or leverage. And those, I think, the idea that you can’t get insurance for everything and that you need collateral, you know, you have to be able to convince someone you’re going to pay them back if you borrow money and collateral is the most convincing way of persuading him he’s going to be paid back, the lender. Those two things were missing from the Standard Theory, so I built a theory around incomplete markets and leverage, which is a critique of the Standard Theory. So in a way Shiller and I have been vindicated by the crash. I mean, so let me just show you a picture here. Well, maybe I will, you know, how bad the crash was. So let’s look at the Dow Jones.The Dow Jones is an average of thirty stocks and what their value is. We’ll talk more about it later. But here it is back to 1913 moving along breezily going up and up and up, you know, there are a few blips which we’ll come to later like this one in 1929, and then–but look what happened lately. Look at that. The Dow Jones was up at 14,000 and it dropped to 6,500, something like that, more than a fifty percent drop and now it’s gone fifty percent up again. So if you believe these finance professors you’d have to say that everybody realized that future profits in America were going to be less than half what they thought they were going to be before and that’s why the stock market dropped. And then miraculously when it hit a bottom everybody figured, “Oh, my gosh, we misunderstood things. Actually it’s not nearly that bad and things are fifty percent higher because now people think that profits really weren’t going to go, you know, didn’t drop in half, didn’t drop by fifty percent, they only dropped by twenty-five percent. And that was the only way, according to the old theory, to explain what happened.Now Shiller would just say, “Well, everybody’s–they’re crazy. They got this into their head that the world was just going to be great and then some rumor started, and things were so high, and the narrative changed and they thought things were terrible,” and this his story. And I’m not sure how he gets it to go up again. They changed their mind again.By the way it’s a little bit better to look at the Dow correcting for inflation and then you see that the 1929 crash looks–and this is on a log scale, remember before the Depression the stock market was so low. It’s grown so much over a hundred years that it hardly seemed like anything was happening. Well, now in log scale–going up two of these is multiplying by ten–you see that in the Depression in 1929 through the early ’30s the stock market fell. I don’t remember what it is. It looks like it’s almost two things. It looks like it’s eighty or ninety percent, and the fall this time has been much smaller, fifty percent, not ninety percent. So it’s a whole thing down but not two things down. It’s not a whole thing down. It’s less than that. A whole thing down would be the square root of ten or a third. It didn’t go down two thirds. It went down less than two thirds. It went down fifty percent, so the actual percentage drop was much worse in the Depression than it is now. We’re going to come back to all these things.What else can we get out of these numbers? I just want you to notice a couple other things. So these numbers are all very interesting. If you’re mathematical these are the sorts of things you pay attention to. So these efficient markets guys, they looked at the change in price every month. So there’s a lot to say for their theory. They said, “Look, it goes up and down randomly.” In fact we’ll see that there are all kinds of tests about whether you can predict it’s going to go up tomorrow on the basis of how it did yesterday, and the answer’s no. It’s very difficult to predict whether the stock market is going up or down. It seems to be random. Well, it’s random and they used to think it was normally distributed. A lot of people argued it was normally distributed, but it’s hard.You never get these gigantic outliers if things are normally distributed. They’re just way too unlikely to happen. So Mandelbrot, who was a Yale professor who retired a couple years ago, although he wasn’t when he formed his theories, the inventor of fractals, he said this couldn’t possibly be a random walk in the traditional Brownian motion sense of the word because you’d never get these big outliers, but he offered no explanation for why they might be there, and I don’t know if Shiller has an explanation either. I mean, is it that people suddenly get shocked one day and then the next week they change their mind and things aren’t so bad after all? But you’ll see that the theory of collateral and margins does explain these kinds of things.Let’s just look at the Dow. We just looked at the Dow. Let’s look at another, the S&amp;P 500. Where’s the S&amp;P 500? Here’s the S&amp;P 500 data. Here’s the history of the S&amp;P 500. It looks very similar to the Dow, except we have longer history back to 1871, so I just want to point out one more thing in the S&amp;P 500. So this is an average of five-hundred stocks, not just thirty, but it’s more or less the same. But let’s look at the same thing taking the logarithm and check for inflation. So you see here that there are these four cycles. Things seemed low in 1871. They go up and they go down. Then you’ve got another up and a down. Then you’ve got another up and a down. Then you’ve another up and a down. Four times the same thing has happened.Now this could be just meaningless accidents, but it will turn out that the demography of the country, the baby boom cycle, we haven’t had just one baby boom we’ve had four of them, so this cycle of stock prices, which they’re each time a generation long, happens to correspond exactly to the rise, the different age distribution in the population. So another theory of the stock market, which wouldn’t have been entertained by these original financial theorists, is that demography has something to do with the stock market, not information about profits and returns but the distribution of ages in the population. So I’m not saying this theory is correct, although I was one of the proponents of it, but it shows that there’s room, I think, in finance for economic things, for demography to matter, for leverage to matter and not just for expectations about future profits.So let me show you another picture. So this is a second way in which Shiller became famous. He said, “Well, look at housing prices,” the Case Shiller Housing Index. So he’s also famous because he had the idea of collecting housing prices. So it’s quite amazing, every town has to record, by law you have to record in the town directory, and they’re often on the internet, what the price is of every sale of every house. So everybody has it and it’s all publicly available on the internet, or most of it is publicly available on the internet. And nobody thought to gather all this information together and take the average and write down an index until Shiller did it. So here’s the Shiller Index. All right, so you can see that housing prices were pretty stable throughout the ’80s and then in and around 2000 they started taking off, so this is when the stock market was taking off too.So Shiller says this is irrational exuberance. People just went crazy. They somehow think things can never go down, and they’re just going to keep going up, and they keep buying because they think things are going to go up, and it’s crazy. Psychology–eventually a new narrative is going to start. Somebody’s going to say, “Oh, they’ve been going up so long they can’t continue to go up. Things have to go down,” and things went down.I think there’s something to psychology so there was something missing in the original finance story. The finance guys, by the way, they would say, “Well, the rise is not so surprising. Look at the mortgage rates. (This is the interest rate you have to pay if you get a mortgage.) There’s been an incredible decline in mortgage rates over the years, so it’s less costly to buy housing. If you take the present value of your expenditures you just have to pay less. You pay over a long period of time, and so the interest rate is less, so the value of the houses is worth more because you’re discounting the future benefits at a lower rate. (You’ll hear all about discounting later.) So there’s no mystery.” On the other hand nothing happened to interest rates. They kept getting lower so there’s no reason why the market should have crashed.So, again, this seems like a vindication for Shiller. Now, it also, in a way, is a vindication for my theory which is non-psychological. So I’m distrustful a little bit of psychology because it can be anything, although I agree it’s important. So my theory is when you take a loan you have to negotiate two things, the interest rate and how much collateral you put up. Who’s going to trust you to pay back? When you buy a house they say, “You can’t just borrow the whole value of the house.” They say, “Well, make a down payment of twenty percent. Borrow eighty percent of the value of a house.” And so what I say is that instead of paying all your attention to the interest rate think about the collateral rate. Why is it twenty percent that you have to put down? Maybe it should be ten percent or forty percent.Well, in fact, that number changes all the time. So here what I’ve done is–the pink line from 2000 to the future, that pink line is Shiller’s Housing Index inverted. So you notice the scale on the right is the housing prices, but I’ve inverted it, and on the left I have the down payment percentage. These are non-agency loans. We’ll come back to the graph later–I don’t have time to explain exactly how I got it–but what you see is that from 2000 onwards the down payment people were asked to make to buy their house got lower, and lower, and lower, and lower and it got down to three percent.You could put down three percent of the value of the house and borrow the other ninety-seven percent of the value of the house to buy it. So amazingly the prices go up and down just with what’s called the leverage. So why is it called leverage? Because the cash you put down payment, say ten percent, you can lever it up and own an asset that’s worth a hundred even though you put down ten dollars. So you’re leveraged 10:1. If you put down three dollars and you get a hundred dollar house you’ve leveraged it 30:1 or 33:1. So that’s why it’s called leverage.So anyway, the point is that leverage went way up. The margins kept going down and down and down and just at the peak of the housing cycle, which is the bottom of that curve, that’s when collateral started getting tougher and people started asking for more money down again, and sure enough the prices turned around. So if you look at the prices of mortgages, again, the inverse on the right, and you look at the margins on the left, not for buying houses but for buying securities–I don’t have time to explain this whole graph, but the blue line is the buying securities. So ‘98 is a big crisis, the margins spike up, I don’t have pricing data back until then. That’s the blue line. And now from 2007 to 2009 you see the margins spiking up. So to buy a toxic mortgage security investors don’t pay cash, they borrow part of the money to buy it. They used to put down only five percent to buy it. Now they have to put down seventy percent to buy it on average.Well, what happened to prices? Prices–this is the inverse of prices–in 2007 they started to collapse. So this going up means prices are collapsing. So once again, the margins–tougher margins means lower prices and as the margins came down recently the prices have gone up recently. So it’s an alternative theory.So what else do I want to show you? So it doesn’t mean that the standard financial theory is wrong. After all, I helped run a hedge fund. Six of us founded it and we’ve been in business for fifteen years. We must believe in standard financial theory because that’s how we’ve been making a lot of our money. We exploit all those algorithms and those are the things I’m going to teach you, so I certainly believe it and it’s very important to teach you that again this semester, but there’s more to the theory than just that.I want to show you one more thing in the Dow Jones or the S&amp;P which I forgot to mention. And where is this? Oh, I can’t get it out of that. Let’s try Dow. Okay, so Dow. Where was the peak of the Dow? It was right over here. Now what was the date? The date’s supposed to flash here. So it’s October 1st 2007. So that’s when people started to realize something was wrong with the world and things headed down. Until then nothing bad seemed to be happening in the world, but suppose that you look not at the Dow, suppose you looked–sorry. Here’s a graph, suppose you looked at the sub-prime mortgage index.So you see it’s a hundred. You’ll understand what these things are. So a hundred means nobody thinks there’s going to be a default. Over here January 2007, that’s ten months before the stock market starts to go down–before it hits its peak. The stock market is still going up here. A month later, this is April 2007, a month later the sub-prime index starts to collapse. You see it goes from a hundred to sixty. We’re already–In February or March 2007. So that means the people, those experts trading mortgages, already realized there was a calamity about to happen. This was long before anyone else perceived anything happening, long before the stock market moved, long before the government did anything to correct the problem. So just as financial theory says if you pay attention to the prices you can learn a lot about the world. The people trading those things–their life depends on fixing the right prices. Probably they know stuff that you don’t know. The prices are going to reflect their opinion. If the price collapsed part of the reason it collapsed, maybe margins and something had something to do with it, but part of the reason it collapsed was because they knew something bad was happening. So for two and half years we’ve known there’s going to be a major catastrophe in the mortgage market.To go from a hundred to sixty and since to twenty is a total calamity. So you know that there are one point seven million people who have already been thrown out of their houses. Another three and a half million aren’t paying their debts and are seriously delinquent. Probably all of them will be thrown out of their houses, and another four or five million after them might default and have to be thrown out of their houses. So it’s a major catastrophe and the market told us and warned us about it two and a half years ago and nobody’s done anything about it, basically, until now as we’ll find out. So it’s not that I think financial theory, the standard financial theory is wrong I think it’s incredibly useful. I just think it has to be supplemented by a more general and richer theory.Maybe I should show you how my hedge fund has done just so that you don’t think that it was a total failure. Oh dear, where is my returns? Here we go, EMG returns, it’s sort of interesting. So Kidder Peabody went out of business in 1994. There was a tremendous crash in the market, a low of the leverage cycle. The purple is Ellington, that’s the hedge fund. You’ll see that these are other investment opportunities. The S&amp;P 500 is the green thing which looked like it was doing great for a while. Emerging markets is the blue one, and high yield is the green one, and then there are bunch of other things like treasuries, and this is Libor which is what banks lend to each other at. So this says if you put your money into any of those strategies, in Libor, keep lending your money each month to a bank and seeing what interest you get and seeing how much money you accumulate, or putting your money in Ellington and looking at the purple, or putting your dollar into the stock market and see what happens, the S&amp;P 500, this is what happens.So you see there was a crash here. You’re fired, you’re fired. So we start Ellington and Ellington does great, and so we have all these years we’re doing great. Then ‘98 there’s another crash. Look what happened. Overnight, practically, we lost a huge amount of money. We almost went out of business. Long Term Capital, which, by the way, was run partly by two Nobel Prize winners, Merton Miller, not Merton Miller, Myron Scholes and Robert Merton, two of the guys I mentioned who were the leaders of the financial crisis , they bankrupted their company and they went out of business. And why did they go out of business? Because they weren’t aware of the leverage cycle, in my view.Anyway, so the prices collapsed. Then look it, all these returns shoot up again and the world seems to be doing great, the stock market, everybody’s doing great. Then there’s another crisis in 2007. Everything plummets all together this time and then everything is going up again. So it’s hard to see this and to live through that.So I remember in ‘98, for example, when there was a margin call. Our lenders called and said, “We want more money. We don’t believe that the assets are worth as much as they were and so the collateral is not covering the loan anymore.” And we said, “You can’t make a margin call. It’s not legal. You promised not to change the margins on us for six months. You can’t make a margin call.” And they said, “Well, blah, blah, blah, we don’t really know about that. We’re making a margin call.” So we called up Warren Buffett and we said, “This is terrible. They’re making a margin call. They can’t do this. We have great bonds. There’s nothing wrong with the bonds. They’re going to force us to sell all the bonds to pay them the money, and how can they force us to do that? They shouldn’t force us to do that. We’ve got great bonds, it’s a great business, it’s a great company and they’re going to run us out of business. You can’t let this happen. Warren Buffett why don’t you buy part of the company and save us and you’ll get rich and it’ll be great.” He said, “Say that again.” And we said, “Well, they’re going to force us to sell all the bonds on Tuesday to meet their margin call and we’ll get terrible prices for the bonds and we’ll be driven out of business, even though they’re great bonds, just because they’re making a margin call. You can’t let this happen to us. Buy part of the business and save us and you’ll get rich. You’ll own part of a great company.” And he said, “Hell, it sounds like I should just show up on Tuesday and buy the bonds.”So we survived. I’ll tell you more about what we did. We survived that, no thanks to Warren Buffett, although he had a pretty good idea, and then we survived the last crash. So we survived all these crashes, but the fact is things go up, they crash, they go up, they crash, they go up.Could it all be my fault? I decided it can’t be all my fault. It’s got to be there’s something more basic at work and that’s why I’m going to tell you about the leverage cycle. Now, of course, I realize that my pet theories may not turn out to be right, although I think more and more people are starting to think there’s something to it. So I’m not going to spend a huge portion of the course just talking about my pet theories. I mean, I recognize that I have to teach partly what’s standard.So the course is going to be divided in the following way. I’m going to talk about the standard no-arbitrage Financial Theory, and I’m going to talk about it theoretically and mathematically and from a practical point of view, because helping to run the hedge fund–lots of the things that I’ll be teaching are things that we actually confronted in the hedge fund. And so you’ll get the standard financial theory course taught from a hedge fund perspective both theoretically and from a practical point of view.On the other hand, I’ve lived now through three mortgage crises and so it seems silly for me not to describe how the mortgage market works, even through you’ll find almost none of that in any standard finance textbooks, how the mortgage market works, and what’s going on, and what happened in the crises, and how we survived and how other people didn’t. And I’ll talk about the leverage cycle. I’ll also spend some time–I think it’s quite important–on the mathematical logic of the invisible hand argument.That’s the most important argument in economics that the free market does good for the economy and a huge number of people believe it. And part of that argument and part of the sort of hazy knowledge of that argument is what drives resistance to a lot of government programs. I mean, the government can only screw things up is what people generally believe. Is it a prejudice or is there some actual argument behind that?. Well, I want to go over that argument and show you precisely how it works and how it doesn’t work in the financial sphere.And then, I want to talk about Social Security. That’s one more program. That’s the biggest program in the budget. It’s as big as defense and the two of those are much bigger than everything else, vastly bigger than every other thing in the budget. So I want to talk about Social Security and should it be privatized and should it be reformed and why did it go bankrupt.It’s also an interesting mathematical problem because Social Security critically involves the belief that things will go on forever, so there’s an infinity in it. Each generation the young are paying for the old. Nobody would do that if they thought they were going to be the last generation paying to the old, and when they got old nobody would help them. So Social Security rests on this world going on forever which makes it mathematically interesting.Anyway, so I got interested in it from a theoretical point of view and then I got put on all these National Academy panels on Social Security and privatizing. And so I know quite a bit about it so I might as well talk about something I know about, so that’s why I’m going to talk about that.All right, so this is too hard for you to read so let’s do this. So let me just give you a few examples. Uh-oh, I hope I didn’t do a terrible thing. No. So let me just give you a few examples here of the kinds, just so you realize there’s something to the Standard Theory. There’s a lot to it. So I’m going to give you ten examples very quickly, of the Standard Theory. So these are things that I’m guessing you’ll have, at least some of them, trouble figuring out how to answer now, but by the end of the course this should be totally obvious to you. So suppose you win the lottery, forty million dollars, it’s a hundred million dollars, the lottery. Now they always give you the choice. Do you want to take five million a year over twenty years or just get forty million dollars right now? Which would you do and how do you think about what to do?So now you get tenure at Yale at the age of 50, say. You’re making a hundred fifty thousand dollars a year and you think professors–it’s going to go up with the rate of inflation, and that’s about it for the next twenty years until you retire. So that’s twenty years of that and then you’re going to live another twenty years when you’re going to be making nothing. So how much of the hundred-fifty-thousand, and let’s say inflation is three percent, and what you’d like to do is consume inflation corrected the same amount every year after you retire and before you retire, and so how much of the hundred-fifty-thousand should you spend this year and how much should you save? You’ll learn very quickly how to do a problem like that.Now, President Levin wrote a few months ago, the end of last year if you remember, he said that, “Well, the crisis was bad. Yale was going to weather it, but Yale had lost twenty-five percent, probably, of its endowment. That’s five-billion dollars almost of the twenty-three-billion dollar endowment. So how much should he choose to cut? It’s his decision. How much should Yale reduce spending every year? The total spending at Yale is a little over two-billion. So the endowment goes down by five-billion what cuts should you take to the budget. Should faculty salaries be cut, be frozen, should you get three TAs instead of four TAs? What should you do? How big a cut should you take?Now, the same question faced Yale in 1996 or so. I’ve forgotten exactly the year. Ten or twelve years ago the previous president, Benno Schmidt, he suddenly noticed that there was deferred maintenance, as he called it, a billion dollars to fix the Yale buildings. That’s why, incidentally, every year another college gets fixed. They decided there was deferred maintenance of a billion dollars. A hundred million dollars every year for ten years had to be spent. The whole endowment then was three billion, and now we had a one billion dollar deferred maintenance problem. The budget was about one billion then. So how much should you cut the Yale budget at that time? So Benno Schmidt said, “I’m firing fifteen percent of the faculty.” He announced he was firing fifteen percent of the faculty. That was on the front page of theNew York Times, “Yale to fire faculty.”Well, did he make the right decision? Rick Levin took over as president three months later, so probably not. What mistake did he make in his calculations? What should he have done? What was the right response? We’re going to talk about it. It’s not that hard a problem.Now, let’s take a slightly more complicated one. You’re a bookie. The World Series is coming up. The Yankees are playing the Dodgers, let’s say, and you know that the teams are evenly matched and you’ve got a bunch of friends who you know every game will be willing to bet at even odds on either side because they think it’s a tossup. Well, one of your customers comes to you and says, he’s a Yankee fan, he’s sure the Yankees are going to win the series. He’s willing to put up three hundred thousand dollars to bet on the Yankees. So if the Yankees win he gets two hundred thousand, but if the Yankees lose he loses three hundred thousand. So 3:2 odds he’s willing to bet on the Yankees winning the series. Well, you say, “This guy’s sort of a sucker here. I can take big advantage of him. On the other hand it’s a lot of money, two hundred thousand I might lose if I have to pay off and the Yankees win. So even though I think that my expected profit is positive, because he’s putting up three hundred thousand to make only two hundred when they’re even odds, in fact–the fact is it’s such a big number I’m a little worried about that.” So what do you do? So what can you do? You’ve got these friends who are willing to bet at even odds each game by game, so how much money–Presumably the first night you’re going to bet with one of your friends. You take the guy’s bet, the customer, you take his three hundred thousand. You promise to deliver him five hundred back if the Yankees win and to keep it if the Yankees lose.What should you do with your friends? Should you bet on the Yankees with your friends? Should you bet on the Dodgers with your friends and how much should you bet at even odds the first night? So the answer is, well, I don’t want to give all the answer now, but so there’s a way of skillfully betting with your friends and not betting two hundred or three hundred thousand the first night with your friends at even odds. You bet some different number than that, which you’ll figure out how much to bet so that if you keep betting through the course of the World Series you can never lose a penny. How do you know how much that is? Well, that’s the kind of clever thing that these finance guys developed and you’re going to know how to do.So let’s do another example like that. I’m running out of time a little bit, but an example. Suppose there’s a deck of cards, twenty-six red and twenty-six black cards. Somebody offers to play a game with you. They say, “If you want to pick a card and it’s black I’ll give you a dollar. If it’s red you give me a dollar.” So if I’m picking, I’m in the black, I get a dollar, it’s in the red I lose a dollar, I have to throw away the card after I pick it. The guy says, “By the way, you can quit whenever you want.” So should you pick the first card? It looks like an even chance of winning or losing. Let’s say you pick the first card, it’s black, you win a dollar. Now the guy says, “Do you want to do it again?” You picked a black one so there’s twenty-six red left and twenty-five black. So now the deck is stacked against you. Should you pick another card? Well, it doesn’t sound like you should pick another card. But you should pick another card and I can even tell you how many cards to pick. Even if you keep getting blacks you should keep picking and picking. So how could that be? It sounds kind of shocking. Well, it’s going to turn out to be very simple for you to solve half way through the course.So, a more basic question. There are thirty year mortgages now you can get for five and three-quarter percent interest. There are fifteen-year mortgages you can get for less, like five point three percent interest. One’s lower than the other. Should you take the fifteen-year mortgage or the thirty year mortgage? How do you even think about that? Why do they offer one at a lower price than the other?One more example, suppose you’re a bank and you hold a bunch of mortgages. That means the people in the houses, you’ve lent them the money, they’re promising to pay you back. And you value all those mortgages at a hundred million dollars. The interest rates go down. The government lowers the interest rates. Half of them take advantage to refinance. They pay you back what they owe and they refinance into a new mortgage. So now you’ve only got half the people left. Let’s say all the people had the same size mortgage and everything. Half the people are left. That shrunken pool, half as big as the original pool, is that worth fifty-million, half of what it was before, or more than fifty-million, or less than fifty-million?How would you decide that? Again, this is a question which might be a little puzzling now, but actually you should be able to get the sign of that today even, and we’ll start to analyze it. So that’s what mortgage traders have to do. They see interest rates went down. A bunch of people acted. The people who are left in the pool are different from the people who started in the pool. Now we’ve got to revalue everything and rethink it all, so how should we do that?Let’s say you run a hedge fund and some investor comes to you and says, “Oh, things are terrible. Look at all the money you lost for me last year. I know you’re doing great this year and you’ve made it all back that you lost last year, but I don’t want to run that risk. So I want to give you my money, a billion dollars, I want to get these superior returns you seem to earn, but you have to guarantee that you don’t lose me a penny. I don’t want to run any risk. I want a principal guarantee (it’s called) that when I give you a hundred dollars you’ll always return my hundred dollars, and hopefully much more, but never less than a hundred dollars.” So is there any way to do that? You know that you’ve got a great strategy, but of course it’s risky. You could lose money. You’ve lost money a bunch of times before. So how can you guarantee the guy that he’ll get all his money back and still have room to run your strategy? Well, it sounds like you can’t do it, but of course a lot of people want to invest that way, so there must be a way to do. So you’ll figure out–we’ll learn how to do that.So, three more short ones. A scientist discovers a potential cure for AIDS. If it works he’s going to make a fortune. He started a company. He’s a Yale scientist, he’s–medical school, started this startup company. Yale, of course, is going to take all his profits, but anyway it’s his startup company and if his thing really works he’s going to make a fortune. If it doesn’t work it’s going to be totally zero. You calculate, and let’s say you believe your calculation, that the expected profits that he’ll make if it works, the probability of it working times the profit, that expected profit is equal to the profits of all of General Electric. Should his company be worth more than General Electric, the same as General Electric, or less than General Electric since it’s got the same expected profits? Well, I can tell you the answer to this one because I think most of you would think, first you’d think, “Well, maybe the same.” Then you’d say, “Well, this AIDS thing it’s so risky. It’s either going to be way up here or nothing, and that’s so risky, and General Electric is so solid, probably General Electric is worth more.” But the answer is the AIDS Company is worth more. So how could that be?So another question, suppose you believed in this efficient market stuff and you rank all the stocks at the end of this year from top to bottom of which stock had the highest return over the year. It’s 2010, let’s say 2010, this year’s a weird year. So let’s say you do it in 2010. All the stocks the highest return to the lowest return. Now, suppose you did the same thing in 2011 with the same stocks? Would you expect to get the same order, or the reverse order, or random order? Now again, if you believe in efficient markets and the market’s really functioning, the prices are fair and all, I’ll bet most of you will say, you won’t know, but you might say it should be random the next time, because firms only did better or worse by luck, but that’s not right either. So you’re going to know how to answer that question by the end of the class.One last one, the Yale endowment over the last fifteen years has gotten something like a fifteen percent annualized return. A hedge fund, that I won’t name, has gotten eleven percent over the last fifteen years counting all its losses and stuff like that. So is it obvious that the Yale endowment has done better than the hedge fund? Would you say that the Yale manager is better than the hedge fund manager? Its return was fifteen percent. The hedge fund only got eleven percent. So I’m asking the question, and I would say that David Swensen would think about it the same way I think about it. So suppose I even told you that the Yale hedge fund had lower volatility–the Yale hedge fund?–the Yale endowment had lower volatility than the hedge fund, which it surely does, would that convince you now that the Yale endowment had been managed better than the hedge fund? Well, we’re going to answer this question again, and you’re going to see that the answer’s a little surprising. It won’t be so surprising–I wouldn’t have brought it up otherwise. But anyway, that’s the kind of thing that in finance you’re taught to think about.So the crisis of 2007, which we’re going to spend a long time talking about, I just want to get back to that subject. So that list of questions were the kinds of things that I used to teach for years before I was confident about my theory of crises, and this is the kind of questions you have to face all the time in hedge funds, and decisions you have to make, and things you have to tell investors, and so that’s the basic part of the course, but I want to say more. So I want to talk about the crisis of 2007-2009. It started as a mortgage crisis. Now, how could it be that everything goes wrong in mortgages? I mean, they’re four thousand years old. The Babylonians invented mortgages. What is a mortgage? You lend somebody money. They put up collateral. They don’t pay you take the house or you take the guys life, he’s a slave or something, but it’s the same thing. You borrow money and the guy promises you can confiscate something if he doesn’t pay. Four thousand years and we screwed it up. How could that be?And why should a screw up in the mortgage market have such a big effect on the rest of the economy? Were sub-prime mortgages a terrible idea? Was there some logic to it? And how did we get out of the crisis? How is it, that everybody was saying this is the worst crisis since the Depression, may be another Depression and things seem to have turned around. What is it that we did to get things to turn around? I don’t think we’re out of it yet, but things are a lot better than they were a year ago. So what is it that the government did to turn things around? It didn’t do nearly enough, I think, but it did something. What exactly did it do? Now, Shiller would talk about the whole thing was irrational exuberance. I’m going to say it’s all the leverage cycle, but anyway so that’s the mortgage crisis.Now, are free markets good? I want to talk about the argument. The argument was first made by Adam Smith about the invisible hand. The modern mathematical argument is Ken Arrow’s, my thesis advisor. And of course everybody knows that monopoly and pollution and things like that interfere with the free market and they have to be regulated. But the financial markets, there’s no monopoly. As long as there’s no monopoly and there’s no pollution shouldn’t the free market function there? So I want to go over that argument and show you what was missing in it, as I said before, and then lastly we’re going to talk about Social Security and how could that system be going bankrupt. I mean, it just seems shocking. There’s a two-trillion dollar trust fund that’s going to run out in 2024 or something and after that the system will be broke.So how did it happen? Why is it broke? What can we do to fix it? So George Bush said, “Well, it’s terrible. Even if we manage to sort of get the trust fund rehabilitated young people like you are going to get a two percent rate of return. If you put your money in the stock market, even allowing for the last crash, over the long haul, the returns have been six percent. So it’s terrible, Social Security. Something’s wrong with the system. We should privatize it and let young people like you put your money in stocks instead.” Well, Gore, in the debate in 2000 said, “You can’t do that because then the old people who are expecting their money can’t get paid.” And both of them agreed that it was all the baby-boomers’ fault. People like me we’re getting old, we’re going to retire. That’s why the system’s going to get broke. So that’s the conventional wisdom. All three of those things are wrong, so we’re going to find out why.So in summary, why study finance? It’s to understand the financial system, which is really part of the economic system. It’s to make informed choices. Is privatizing Social Security a good or bad thing? Is regulation of financial markets a good thing? The language that you learn is the language that’s spoken on Wall Street, and was created by professors and yet practitioners use it. For me it’s incredibly fun, all these little puzzles. As J.P. Morgan said, “Money’s just a way of keeping score.” You have to figure out what something’s worth in the end and if you get it right you’ve solved the puzzle right and it’ll help you make good financial decisions in a pensioned career. That’s the standard reason to take Finance.Now, the prerequisites of the course, so I want to make this clear, you don’t really need ECON 115. It would be helpful because this logic of the free market being good or bad, that was already started in ECON 115. That’s what they call it now, right? It’s still called 115. I used to teach it but I haven’t done it for years. So anyway, what you really need is mathematical self-confidence. It’s not going to be high math. It’s going to be simple math, but it’s relentless over and over again. And I can tell you that every year there’s the five percent of you, let’s five or ten out of the hundred-twenty are going to just get bored doing problem after problem and you’re probably not that, you know, those ten maybe haven’t that much experience doing it, don’t feel very confident doing it, stop coming to the class and then really have no idea what’s going on. My sister is probably much smarter than I am, but she doesn’t like math. She wouldn’t take this course. So if you’re not confident doing little mathematical problems just don’t take the course. You’ll save yourself a lot of trouble.I don’t know how to say this any better. I want to warn you not to do it. It’s easy math, but it never stops. Every week there’s going to be a problem set. The exam–there are problem sets. The exam is doing problems just like the problem sets, but if you don’t like that, you know, to me finance is a quantitative subject. What’s so beautiful about it in one aspect I really like is that you have these complicated different things you have to weigh, but at the end you have to come up with one number. What is the price you’re willing to pay for something? It’s very concrete. I’m going to take advantage of the concreteness by turning every question into a number. I hate it when you get on the one hand and on the other hand. It’s a number. So if you don’t like numbers it’s not a good course to take.So what are the kinds of things you have to know? You have to understand the distributive law of arithmetic (which, I have little kids and I see that’s not so easy to understand). Anyway, and then you have to understand the idea of a function which is a contingent plan. Simultaneous equations; that’s what we do for equilibrium in arbitrage. Taking a derivative, that’s marginal utility. The idea of diminishing marginal utility, a concave function looks like that. That’s risk aversion. Bankers invented the logarithm, compound interest, so you have to know what taking a logarithm and exponential means, and you have to understand how to take probability weighted averages of things. And we’re going to use Excel for a lot of the problems which we’ll teach you. By the end of a day you’ll be better at it than I am.So my office hours are four to six. My secretary assistant is Rendé, there’s an accent missing as she always tells me, Wilson. She just started three days ago but I’m sure she’ll be great. There are going to be two lectures a week and a TA section. So every Tuesday there’ll be a problem set starting this Tuesday due the next Tuesday. There will be two midterms. There’s a lot of stuff to learn and so I found, everybody I think agrees who’s taken the course, if you take the midterm it’ll focus your mind and make it a lot easier, so I give two of them so you only have half the course to study. It makes the final much easier to study for.I recognize that some of you will have problems on one of them, like especially the first mid-term, and if you do vastly worse on one exam than the rest I’ll tend to ignore that, but most people don’t, by the way, do vastly worse on one exam than the rest. So the final’s forty, the problem set’s twenty, and the two midterms are twenty percent. Tuesday to Thursday, and so all the TA sessions are Thursday to Monday so they’re going to start next Thursday. So you see the classes are Tuesday-Thursday then the next Tuesday. There’s a long time in-between here so all the TA sessions will meet there. So they’re at the same moment in the class.There are all these textbooks, all by the Nobel Prize winners, all by those financial greats. You can buy any one of them, but I have my own lecture notes because as I say I teach a slightly unconventional course and there’s a huge list of books on the crisis. Some of them are incredibly interesting and fun, and so they’re all on the reading list you can take a look at. I mean, there’s never been a more fun time to read this stuff now. So course improvements, anyway. So that’s it.Are there any questions about how the course runs, or how I will run it, or whether you think you should take the course, or whether your preparations–So if you haven’t taken ECON 15 it’s okay, 115, but you’ve got to be confident that you can solve problems, otherwise don’t do it. Any questions? Yes?Student: So the first problem set will be assigned next Tuesday?Professor John Geanakoplos: Yeah, so next Tuesday it’s going to be due the Tuesday after. So I know that’s early, but you probably already know whether you’re going to take the course or not. Yes?Student: Will you teach this next year?Professor John Geanakoplos: Will I teach it next year? Actually I probably won’t because I’m going to go on leave, but I might, but probably not. Someone else will teach it. Yep?Student: Which of the books do you suggest we buy?Professor John Geanakoplos: They’re all good. They’re all famous people who’ve written. They’re trying to sell copies so they’re pitched at a quite low level, but they’re very good. Anyone of them is good. Merton’s book is good. Steve Ross is a friend of mine. He used to teach at Yale, so his book is good. So any one of those is very good, but they’re not quite at the same mathematical level because they’re trying to sell thousands of books, and they stick pretty closely to this financial view of the world that everything is efficient. Yes?Student: Will the taped lectures be available online?Professor John Geanakoplos: That’s a good question. I don’t think so. No, they’re shaking their head. So it won’t be in time for you, but it will be if you want to look back in your old age, “I was there. I saw the leverage cycle.” Sorry. Yes?Student: Are the lecture slides posted before or after the lecture?Professor John Geanakoplos: Oh, the lecture notes are all posted already before the class. So the first twelve of them are there, and I’m changing them each year so there’ll be some changes. So last year’s first twelve are there and they might change a little bit, but you can already get an idea of what they’re about. This first lecture is not on, but the rest of them are. Any other questions? Yes?Student: When do we sign up for the TA sections?Professor John Geanakoplos: Oh, you should be signing up now. I don’t know how to do this. It’s online or something, right? You sign up online. Yeah, so you should pick your sections. We might add another section if all of you stay, but probably you won’t, but if we do we’ll add another TA section. Yes?Student: What’s the grade distribution?Professor John Geanakoplos: The grade distribution? I don’t know. The standard Yale junior level course grade distribution which is when I was at Yale things were much tougher, so it’s the standard distribution. I don’t remember it offhand. But I’ll tell you all about the distribution at the midterm. So there will be a midterm before–you’ll have chance to drop the course after the midterm and then there will be another midterm right at the end of the course. Yes?Student: What level of math and type of math should we be comfortable with to take the course?Professor John Geanakoplos: I was trying to say that. I’m glad you asked me again. So I went over the things that you have to know. If you have 3x-4x2 you have to be able to take the derivative of that which is 3-8x. If you’ve got the log natural of x you have to take the derivative. It’s one over x. If you’ve got 3x+5=10 and 2x-7=12 you have to be able to solve that simultaneous equation. So that’s the kind of thing you have to do, and you have to be able to do it quickly and with total confidence that you’re doing it right. And for many of you that’s no problem, but for some of you who are maybe even smarter than everybody else that’s a problem, and so you’ll have to judge yourself whether you can do that comfortably so you don’t have to worry about the mechanics of doing that. You can think conceptually about what the question is asking.When does this end, ten of or quarter of?Student: Ten of.Professor John Geanakoplos: Ten of, so we have 13 minutes. I want to end with one experiment. So (Teaching Assistant), can you help me with this? So this is something we’re not going to have time to figure out the answer to. So I need sixteen volunteers. How about the first two rows? Why don’t you just volunteer. You’ll survive, and I know it’s a drag but you’ll do it. What I’m going to do now is I’m going to run an auction. So please stand up and eight of you go this side and eight come over here. That’s okay, you’ll be okay. I know everyone’s reluctant to do this. So I only need sixteen. (TA), help me count them. Two, four, six, eight, you guys have to come the other way. The TAs aren’t going to participate. You’re not in this, right? No. Two, four, six, eight so we only need eight, you both sat down. So would you like to participate? Come on. We could use another woman here. Two, four, six, eight, there are eight of them? So can you mix these up? There are going to be eight sellers and eight, we say seller, right? Buyer, so shuffle them up and hand one to each. So we’ve got eight, and these are the football, they’re selling. So we’ve got eight sellers and eight buyers, and I don’t know whether you’ve ever seen this experiment before, but shuffle them, right?Student: They’re all sellers though.Professor John Geanakoplos: They’re all sellers, but you’ve got to shuffle them. On the other side there’s a number. So we’ve got eight sellers here and eight buyers. So each seller knows what his football ticket is worth, or hers, so please take one.Student: I have a seller one.Professor John Geanakoplos: Oh, you have a seller one? That’s bad.Student: Yes.Professor John Geanakoplos: I’m blind.Student: Thank you.Professor John Geanakoplos: Buyer, thank you. Does this say buyer and buyer? You should be one short. Here’s an extra. So there are eight sellers and eight buyers. They’ve got the football tickets. Each of them knows what the football ticket is worth to her. There are three women here and only two, so these are the “hers”. She knows exactly what it’s worth to her. So say it’s fifteen. The football ticket’s worth fifteen. Now if she can sell it for more than fifteen she’s going to do it. She’s going to make a profit. If she sells it for less than fifteen she’s not a very good trader. She’s not going to do that. She’s going to say, “If I can get more than the football ticket is worth I’m going to sell it. If I can’t get more than it’s worth I won’t sell it.” So everybody knows what the football ticket is worth to herself.All these guys, they know what the ticket is worth to them. So say someone thinks it’s worth thirty that guy’s going to say, “If I can get it for less than thirty, like for fifteen, I’m going to get it. That’ll give me a profit of fifteen. If I can only get it for forty I’m sure not going to do that because I’m paying more than I think it’s worth. So you all got that? You have a reservation value yourself. You don’t want to pay more than it’s worth because then you’re losing money, and they want to sell it for more than they think it’s worth because then they’re making money. So nobody knows anybody else’s valuation. The information is distributed completely randomly across the class.Now this is a famous experiment. I’m not the first one to run it, although I’ve done it for ten years. I do it in my graduate class, in my undergraduate class, the undergraduates, by the way, always do better than the graduate students. So this knowledge is distributed in the whole environment, and we’re going to see what happens when I start a chaotic interaction between all of these sixteen people. What’s going to happen? And you would think it’d be total chaos and nothing sensible is going to happen. And if that does happen it’ll be very embarrassing for me. But what the efficient markets guys would say is, “Something amazing is going to happen. The market is going to discover what everybody thinks it’s worth and figure out exactly the best and right thing to do and that’s what’s going to happen.”Now, it’s hard to believe that with this little preparation that you’ve had, zero, zero training, zero experience, and you’re only going to have two minutes to do this. So see the class has got eight minutes to go. You’re going to miss the grand finale. Anyway, so you’ve only got eight minutes to go. So with only two minutes of training they’re going to get to a result, which if I had to do it myself and read all the numbers and sort them out and sort through them would take me much more than two minutes, and all this is going to happen in two minutes. It’s hard to believe. It probably won’t happen this time.So here are the rules. I’m going to put you all together. Start inching your way towards each other, and try not–now, when I say go, which won’t be for two minutes you’re going to start yelling out an offer. So if you think it’s worth fifteen and you’re a seller you’re not going to sell it for fifteen. You’re going to say give me twenty, or give me thirty, or give me twenty-five. You’re going to try and get as much as you can. You have to yell it out. The buyers are going to be making their offers. When two of you see that there’s a deal you have to shake hands, exchange the football, and leave, and tell your numbers to (TA). Where’s (TA)? (TA), you’re going to stand outside the group that way. So once you make a deal you just leave and tell what’s happened to (TA) who’s now standing back here, back there. So it has to be public outcry. It’s very important that you’re yelling these things publically and all the other people can hear you, and you’ve only got two minutes.Now two minutes sounds like an incredibly short period of time, which it is, but it’s much longer than you think, wait, quiet here. You shouldn’t trade–I’m giving you valuable advice–you should not trade in the first ten or fifteen seconds because you have to hear what everybody else is offering. If you trade right away you’re probably doing something really stupid. Two minutes, though, it sounds short, is actually a very long period of time. So be patient. Try to get the best possible price and we’ll see what happens. Any questions about what you’re doing? And now, in the heat of the moment you might be so frustrated that you can’t sell when you think it’s worth fifteen that you sell it for ten. I’m going to expose you in front of all these people if you do that, so keep track of what you think the thing is worth. All right, any questions anybody about what is going on? So you have two minutes. Is there a second hand there? I can’t see it. No?Student: It’s on the ten, or coming to.Professor John Geanakoplos: Where is it?Student: Now it’s on the three.Student: It’s moving.Professor John Geanakoplos: It’s on the three. I think I see something. When it gets to the four we’re going to start. So start, go.&lt;&gt;Professor John Geanakoplos: Oh, no collusion. No collusion.&lt;&gt;Professor John Geanakoplos: Come out and tell (TA). If you made a deal tell (TA).&lt;&gt;Professor John Geanakoplos: How much time is left? One minute left, plenty of time, one minute. Any other deal made? Write down the price and the two, what price they agreed. How much time? Twenty-five seconds, stay cool. How much time? How much time? I can’t see. Fifteen. Stay cool. Don’t make any mistakes, ten, five, four, three, two, one, stop. Did you get all the numbers?&lt;&gt;Professor John Geanakoplos: Give me back the tickets.Student: Was this designed to make us look bad on camera?Professor John Geanakoplos: Give me back the tickets.Student: You designed this to make us look bad on camera.Professor John Geanakoplos: No, you’re going to look great on camera, you are. Give me all the tickets back. (TA), you getting done there?Teaching Assistant: Yeah.Professor John Geanakoplos: All the tickets. I need them all back, all the stuff. God, you’re big folders here. These tickets have lasted ten years until you guys took over. They’re all crumpled up. All the tickets, I need them all back. You can sit down now. Everybody’s reported in? Now let’s see what happened. You’ve got them all? Five traded.Teaching Assistant: Five traded.Professor John Geanakoplos: Five bought and sold. So here’s what happened. Here were the numbers. So we have five minutes just to look at this. So all the buyer prices are in blue, forty-four, forty, thirty-six, you should recognize these you buyers, and the red ones were the sellers. So you notice that every seller, for everybody there’s a seller who’s underneath. So it could have happened that thirty-eight sold to forty-four, and thirty-four sold to forty at thirty-seven, and twenty-eight sold to thirty-six at thirty-two. You could have had eight trades. So what did happen? Nothing like that happened. You had five trades, five pairs of people traded, and there are those three poor schlumps, pairs of people at the end looking despondent, hopeless, unable to trade, worried that they were on camera. Now, let’s see, who are the people who traded? So, (TA), name the buyers who bought.Teaching Assistant: I don’t know the names.Professor John Geanakoplos: The prices.Teaching Assistant: The seller got it for nine and managed to sell it for twenty dollars. It was all quick so I don’t have everybody’s name, because they were all rushing.Professor John Geanakoplos: You got them.Teaching Assistant: I got them.Professor John Geanakoplos: That’s everything, great.Teaching Assistant: I just don’t have their names.Professor John Geanakoplos: Here’s what happened. Mister seller ten sold to thirty-six at a price of twenty. Mister seller nine sold to buyer twenty, so nine, there is no nine.Teaching Assistant: Six.Professor John Geanakoplos: Nine sold to twenty at a price of what? Six.Teaching Assistant: Sorry.Professor John Geanakoplos: That’s okay. So seller six sold to twenty at a price of twenty.Student: Yeah, even though it’s cheaper &lt;&gt;.Professor John Geanakoplos: No, no, buyer twenty paid twenty, so seller six did well. We won’t ask who buyer twenty is. Buyer twenty is going to screw everything up. So Buyer fourteen through–I can’t read this either.Teaching Assistant: Forty-four.Professor John Geanakoplos: Buyer fourteen sold to buyer forty-four for twenty, and buyer twenty sold to buyer forty for twenty-two, and seller twenty-four sold to buyer thirty for twenty-five. So five people traded, now which five were they? The sellers were ten, six, fourteen and twenty-four, one, two, three, four, five, the bottom five. The five buyers were thirty-six, twenty, forty-four, forty and thirty. So basically forty-four, forty, thirty-six, thirty, twenty-six didn’t buy, twenty bought instead. So if you look at it, so it’s not quite the way theory would have predicted, but almost. If you look at it, if you just shuffle the order and you put the sellers, instead of from top to bottom you put them from bottom to top, you get what looks like a demand curve and a supply curve. And so what happened?All these five people ended up selling, one, two, three, four, five, those are exactly the sellers. The price they sold for was all between twenty and twenty-five, and the five buyers were forty-four, forty, thirty-six, thirty. Twenty-six didn’t manage to buy, but twenty bought. So what is the theory of the free market? The theory of the free market says, “This chaotic situation where they had less than two minutes to decide what to do could be analyzed as if you put a demand curve together with a supply curve and there was one price that they miraculously knew. Here it should have been twenty-five. It turned out to be twenty or twenty-two that all the trade took place at. At that one price you get all the trades happening. The people have the highest valuation buyers they’re the ones who get the tickets. The people with the lowest valuation sellers sell it. So the people who end up with the tickets are these red guys at the top and the blue guys at the top. All the tickets go from the people who value the stuff least to the people who value it more. So the market has done an extraordinary thing in two minutes.So there was one mistake. Mister or miss twenty, whose identity we are protecting, although I’m searching the faces, mister or miss twenty got a very bad deal. She or he, let’s say he, bought at twenty when the value was twenty. That was a horrible deal. He didn’t get any extra out of it. So he should probably have only bought if the price were lower, and then twenty-six would have bought instead of twenty. So twenty sort of squeezed his way into the market, so twenty-six and twenty between them somehow there was a slight inefficiency. But basically with no training, no background, no practice, these sixteen undergraduates managed to reproduce–they gathered all the information in the whole economy, and they discovered who were the eight people who valued the tickets the most and they ended up with all the tickets. For me to do it and sort it out would have taken longer. The market solves a complicated problem, and gets information incredibly quickly, and puts things into the hands of the people who value it the most. And the marginal buyer thought it was worth about twenty-five or twenty and that’s what the price turned out to be. So anyway, we’re going to come back to this parable at the beginning of the next class.Professor Ben Polak: So this is Game Theory Economics 159. If you’re here for art history, you’re either in the wrong room or stay anyway, maybe this is the right room; but this is Game Theory, okay. You should have four handouts; everyone should have four handouts. There is a legal release form–we’ll talk about it in a minute–about the videoing. There is a syllabus, which is a preliminary syllabus: it’s also online. And there are two games labeled Game 1 and Game 2. Can I get you all to look at Game 1 and start thinking about it. And while you’re thinking about it, I am hoping you can multitask a bit. I’ll describe a bit about the class and we’ll get a bit of admin under our belts. But please try and look at–somebody’s not looking at it, because they’re using it as a fan here–so look at Game 1 and fill out that form for me, okay?So while you’re filling that out, let me tell you a little bit about what we’re going to be doing here. So what is Game Theory? Game Theory is a method of studying strategic situations. So what’s a strategic situation? Well let’s start off with what’s not a strategic situation. In your Economics - in your Intro Economics class in 115 or 110, you saw some pretty good examples of situations that were not strategic. You saw firms working in perfect competition. Firms in perfect competition are price takers: they don’t particularly have to worry about the actions of their competitors. You also saw firms that were monopolists and monopolists don’t have any competitors to worry about, so that’s not a particularly strategic situation. They’re not price takers but they take the demand curve. Is this looking familiar for some of you who can remember doing 115 last year or maybe two years ago for some of you? Everything in between is strategic. So everything that constitutes imperfect competition is a strategic setting. Think about the motor industry, the motor car industry. Ford has to worry about what GM is doing and what Toyota is doing, and for the moment at least what Chrysler is doing but perhaps not for long. So there’s a small number of firms and their actions affect each other.So for a literal definition of what strategic means: it’s a setting where the outcomes that affect you depend on actions, not just on your own actions, but on actions of others. All right, that’s as much as I’m going to say for preview right now, we’re going to come back and see plenty of this over the course of the next semester.So what I want to do is get on to where this applies. It obviously applies in Economics, but it also applies in politics, and in fact, this class will count as a Political Science class if you’re a Political Science major. You should go check with the DUS in Political Science. It count - Game Theory is very important in law these days. So for those of you–for the half of you–that are going to end up in law school, this is pretty good training. Game Theory is also used in biology and towards the middle of the semester we’re actually going to see some examples of Game Theory as applied to evolution. And not surprisingly, Game Theory applies to sport.So let’s talk about a bit of admin. How are you doing on filling out those games? Everyone managing to multitask: filling in Game 1? Keep writing. I want to get some admin out of the way and I want to start by getting out of the way what is obviously the elephant in the room. Some of you will have noticed that there’s a camera crew here, okay. So as some of you probably know, Yale is undergoing an open education project and they’re videoing several classes, and the idea of this, is to make educational materials available beyond the walls of Yale. In fact, on the web, internationally, so people in places, maybe places in the U.S. or places miles away, maybe in Timbuktu or whatever, who find it difficult to get educational materials from the local university or whatever, can watch certain lectures from Yale on the web.Some of you would have been in classes that do that before. What’s going to different about this class is that you’re going to be participating in it. The way we teach this class is we’re going to play games, we’re going to have discussions, we’re going to talk among the class, and you’re going to be learning from each other, and I want you to help people watching at home to be able to learn too. And that means you’re going to be on film, at the very least on mike.So how’s that going to work? Around the room are three T.A.s holding mikes. Let me show you where they are: one here, one here, and one here. When I ask for classroom discussions, I’m going to have one of the T.A.s go to you with a microphone much like in “Donahue” or something, okay. At certain times, you’re going to be seen on film, so the camera is actually going to come around and point in your direction.Now I really want this to happen. I had to argue for this to happen, cause I really feel that this class isn’t about me. I’m part of the class obviously, but it’s about you teaching each other and participating. But there’s a catch, the catch is, that that means you have to sign that legal release form.So you’ll see that you have in front of you a legal release form, you have to be able to sign it, and what that says is that we can use you being shown in class. Think of this as a bad hair day release form. All right, you can’t sue Yale later if you had a bad hair day. For those of you who are on the run from the FBI, your Visa has run out, or you’re sitting next to your ex-girlfriend, now would be a good time to put a paper bag over your head.All right, now just to get you used to the idea, in every class we’re going to have I think the same two people, so Jude is the cameraman; why don’t you all wave to Jude: this is Jude okay. And Wes is our audio guy: this is Wes. And I will try and remember not to include Jude and Wes in the classroom discussions, but you should be aware that they’re there. Now, if this is making you nervous, if it’s any consolation, it’s making me very nervous.So, all right, we’ll try and make this class work as smoothly as we can, allowing for this extra thing. Let me just say, no one’s making any money off this–at least I’m hoping these guys are being paid–but me and the T.A.s are not being paid. The aim of this, that I think is a good aim, it’s an educational project, and I’m hoping you’ll help us with it. The one difference it is going to mean, is that at times I might hold some of the discussions for the class, coming down into this part of the room, here, to make it a little easier for Jude.All right, how are we doing now on filling out those forms? Has everyone filled in their strategy for the first game? Not yet. Okay, let’s go on doing a bit more admin. The thing you mostly care about I’m guessing, is the grades. All right, so how is the grade going to work for this class? 30% of the class will be on problem sets, 30% of the grade; 30% on the mid-term, and 40% on the final; so 30/30/40.The mid-term will be held in class on October 17th; that is also in your syllabus. Please don’t anybody tell me late - any time after today you didn’t know when the mid-term was and therefore it clashes with 17 different things. The mid-term is on October 17th, which is a Wednesday, in class. All right, the problem sets: there will be roughly ten problem sets and I’ll talk about them more later on when I hand them out. The first one will go out on Monday but it will be due ten days later. Roughly speaking they’ll be every week.The grade distribution: all right, so this is the rough grade distribution. Roughly speaking, a sixth of the class are going to end up with A’s, a sixth are going to end up with A-, a sixth are going to end up with B+, a sixth are going to end up with B, a sixth are going to end up with B-, and the remaining sixth, if I added that up right, are going to end up with what I guess we’re now calling the presidential grade, is that right?That’s not literally true. I’m going to squeeze it a bit, I’m going to curve it a bit, so actually slightly fewer than a sixth will get straight A’s, and fewer than a sixth will get C’s and below. We’ll squeeze the middle to make them be more B’s. One thing I can guarantee from past experience in this class, is that the median grade will be a B+. The median will fall somewhere in the B+’s. Just as forewarning for people who have forgotten what a median is, that means half of you–not approximately half, it means exactly half of you–will be getting something like B+ and below and half will get something like B+ and above.Now, how are you doing in filling in the forms? Everyone filled them in yet? Surely must be pretty close to getting everyone filled in. All right, so last things to talk about before I actually collect them in - textbooks. There are textbooks for this class. The main textbook is this one, Dutta’s book Strategy and Games. If you want a slightly tougher book, more rigorous book, try Joel Watson’s book, Strategies. Both of those books are available at the bookstore.But I want to warn everybody ahead of time, I will not be following the textbook. I regard these books as safety nets. If you don’t understand something that happened in class, you want to reinforce an idea that came up in class, then you should read the relevant chapters in the book and the syllabus will tell you which chapters to read for each class, or for each week of class, all right. But I will not be following these books religiously at all. In fact, they’re just there as back up.In addition, I strongly recommend people read, Thinking Strategically. This is good bedtime reading. Do any of you suffer from insomnia? It’s very good bedtime reading if you suffer from insomnia. It’s a good book and what’s more there’s going to be a new edition of this book this year and Norton have allowed us to get advance copies of it. So if you don’t buy this book this week, I may be able to make the advance copy of the new edition available for some of you next week. I’m not taking a cut on that either, all right, there’s no money changing hands.All right, sections are on the syllabus sign up - sorry on the website, sign up as usual. Put yourself down on the wait list if you don’t get into the section you want. You probably will get into the section you want once we’re done.All right, now we must be done with the forms. Are we done with the forms? All right, so why don’t we send the T.A.s, with or without mikes, up and down the aisles and collect in your Game #1; not Game #2, just Game #1.Just while we’re doing that, I think the reputation of this class–I think–if you look at the course evaluations online or whatever, is that this class is reasonably hard but reasonably fun. So I’m hoping that’s what the reputation of the class is. If you think this class is going to be easy, I think it isn’t actually an easy class. It’s actually quite a hard class, but I think I can guarantee it’s going to be a fun class. Now one reason it’s a fun class, is the nice thing about teaching Game Theory - quieten down folks–one thing about teaching Game Theory is, you get to play games, and that’s exactly what we’ve just been doing now. This is our first game and we’re going to play games throughout the course, sometimes several times a week, sometimes just once a week.We got all these things in? Everyone handed them in? So I need to get those counted. Has anyone taken the Yale Accounting class? No one wants to - has aspirations to be - one person has. I’ll have a T.A. do it, it’s all right, we’ll have a T.A. do it. So Kaj, can you count those for me? Is that right? Let me read out the game you’ve just played.“Game 1, a simple grade scheme for the class. Read the following carefully. Without showing your neighbor what you are doing, put it in the box below either the letter Alpha or the letter Beta. Think of this as a grade bid. I will randomly pair your form with another form and neither you nor your pair will ever know with whom you were paired. Here’s how the grades may be assigned for the class.  If you put Alpha and you’re paired with Beta, then you will get an A and your pair a C. If you and your pair both put Alpha, you’ll both get B-. If you put Beta and you’re paired with Alpha, you’ll get a C and your pair an A. If you and your pair both put Beta, then you’ll both get B+.”So that’s the thing you just filled in.Now before we talk about this, let’s just collect this information in a more useful way. So I’m going to remove this for now. We’ll discuss this in a second, but why don’t we actually record what the game is, that we’re playing, first. So this is our grade game, and what I’m going to do, since it’s kind of hard to absorb all the information just by reading a paragraph of text, I’m going to make a table to record the information. So what I’m going to do is I’m going to put me here, and my pair, the person I’m randomly paired with here, and Alpha and Beta, which are the choices I’m going to make here and on the columns Alpha and Beta, the choices my pair is making.In this table, I’m going to put my grades. So my grade if we both put Alpha is B-, if we both put Beta, was B+. If I put Alpha and she put a Beta, I got an A, and if I put Beta and she put an Alpha, I got a C. Is that correct? That’s more or less right? Yeah, okay while we’re here, why don’t we do the same for my pair? So this is my grades on the left hand table, but now let’s look at what my pair will do, what my pair will get.So I should warn the people sitting at the back that my handwriting is pretty bad, that’s one reason for moving forward. The other thing I should apologize at this stage of the class is my accent. I will try and improve the handwriting, there’s not much I can do about the accent at this stage.So once again if you both put Alpha then my pair gets a B-. If we both put Beta, then we both get a B+; in particular, my pair gets a B+. If I put Alpha and my pair puts Beta, then she gets a C. And if I put Beta and she puts Alpha, then she gets an A. So I now have all the information that was on the sheet of paper that you just handed in.Now there’s another way of organizing this that’s standard in Game Theory, so we may as well get used to it now on the first day. Rather then drawing two different tables like this, what I’m going to do is I’m going to take the second table and super-impose it on top of the first table. Okay, so let me do that and you’ll see what I mean. What I’m going to do is draw a larger table, the same basic structure: I’m choosing Alpha and Beta on the rows, my pair is choosing Alpha and Beta on the columns, but now I’m going to put both grades in. So the easy ones are on the diagonal: you both get B- if we both choose Alpha; we both get B+ if we both choose Beta. But if I choose Alpha and my pair chooses Beta, I get an A and she gets a C. And if I choose Beta and she chooses Alpha, then it’s me who gets the C and it’s her who gets the A.So notice what I did here. The first grade corresponds to the row player, me in this case, and the second grade in each box corresponds to the column player, my pair in this case. So this is a nice succinct way of recording what was in the previous two tables. This is an outcome matrix; this tells us everything that was in the game.Okay, so now seems a good time to start talking about what people did. So let’s just have a show of hands. How many of you chose Alpha? Leave your hands up so that Jude can catch that, so people can see at home, okay. All right and how many of you chose Beta? There’s far more Alphas - wave your hands the Beta’s okay. All right, there’s a Beta here, okay. So it looks like a lot of - well we’re going to find out, we’re going to count–but a lot more Alpha’s than Beta’s. Let me try and find out some reasons why people chose.So let me have the Alpha’s up again. So, the woman who’s in red here, can we get a mike to the - yeah, is it okay if we ask you? You’re not on the run from the FBI? We can ask you why? Okay, so you chose Alpha right? So why did you choose Alpha?Student:  realized that my partner chose Alpha, therefore I chose .Professor Ben Polak: All right, so you wrote out these squares, you realized what your partner was going to do, and responded to that. Any other reasons for choosing Alpha around the room? Can we get the woman here? Try not to be intimidated by these microphones, they’re just mikes. It’s okay.Student: The reason I chose Alpha, regardless of what my partner chose, I think there would be better outcomes than choosing Beta.Professor Ben Polak: All right, so let me ask your names for a second-so your name was?Student: Courtney.Professor Ben Polak: Courtney and your name was?Student: Clara Elise.Professor Ben Polak: Clara Elise. So slightly different reasons, same choice Alpha. Clara Elise’s reason - what did Clara Elise say? She said, no matter what the other person does, she reckons she’d get a better grade if she chose Alpha. So hold that thought a second, we’ll come back to - is it Clara Elise, is that right? We’ll come back to Clara Elise in a second. Let’s talk to the Beta’s a second; let me just emphasize at this stage there are no wrong answers. Later on in the class there’ll be some questions that have wrong answers. Right now there’s no wrong answers. There may be bad reasons but there’s no wrong answers. So let’s have the Beta’s up again. Let’s see the Beta’s. Oh come on! There was a Beta right here. You were a Beta right? You backed off the Beta, okay. So how can I get a mike into a Beta? Let’ s stick in this aisle a bit. Is that a Beta right there? Are you a Beta right there? Can I get the Beta in here? Who was the Beta in here? Can we get the mike in there? Is that possible? In here - you can leave your hand so that - there we go. Just point towards - that’s fine, just speak into it, that’s fine.Student: So the reason right?Professor Ben Polak: Yeah, go ahead.Student: I personally don’t like swings that much and it’s the B-/B+ range, so I’d much rather prefer that to a swing from A to C, and that’s my reason.Professor Ben Polak: All right, so you’re saying it compresses the range. I’m not sure it does compress the range. I mean if you chose Alpha, you’re swinging from A to B-; and from Beta, swinging from B+ to C. I mean those are similar kind of ranges but it certainly is a reason. Other reasons for choosing? Yeah, the guy in blue here, yep, good. That’s all right. Don’t hold the mike; just let it point at you, that’s fine.Student: Well I guess I thought we could be more collusive and kind of work together, but I guess not. So I chose Beta.Professor Ben Polak: There’s a siren in the background so I missed the answer. Stand up a second, so we can just hear you.Student: Sure.Professor Ben Polak: Sorry, say again.Student: Sure. My name is Travis. I thought we could work together, but I guess not.Professor Ben Polak: All right good. That’s a pretty good reason.Student: If you had chosen Beta we would have all gotten B+’s but I guess not.Professor Ben Polak: Good, so Travis is giving us a different reason, right? He’s saying that maybe, some of you in the room might actually care about each other’s grades, right? I mean you all know each other in class. You all go to the same college. For example, if we played this game up in the business school–are there any MBA students here today? One or two. If we play this game up in the business school, I think it’s quite likely we’re going to get a lot of Alpha’s chosen, right? But if we played this game up in let’s say the Divinity School, all right and I’m guessing that Travis’ answer is reflecting what you guys are reasoning here. If you played in the Divinity School, you might think that people in the Divinity School might care about other people’s grades, right? There might be ethical reasons–perfectly good, sensible, ethical reasons–for choosing Beta in this game. There might be other reasons as well, but that’s perhaps the reason to focus on. And perhaps, the lesson I want to draw out of this is that right now this is not a game. Right now we have actions, strategies for people to take, and we know what the outcomes are, but we’re missing something that will make this a game. What are we missing here?Student: Objectives.Professor Ben Polak: We’re missing objectives. We’re missing payoffs. We’re missing what people care about, all right. So we can’t really start analyzing a game until we know what people care about, and until we know what the payoffs are. Now let’s just say something now, which I’ll probably forget to say in any other moment of the class, but today it’s relevant.Game Theory, me, professors at Yale, cannot tell you what your payoff should be. I can’t tell you in a useful way what it is that your goals in life should be or whatever. That’s not what Game Theory is about. However, once we know what your payoffs are, once we know what your goals are, perhaps Game Theory can you help you get there.So we’ve had two different kinds of payoffs mentioned here. We had the kind of payoff where we care about our own grade, and Travis has mentioned the kind of payoff where you might care about other people’s grades. And what we’re going to do today is analyze this game under both those possible payoffs. To start that off, let’s put up some possible payoffs for the game. And I promise we’ll come back and look at some other payoffs later. We’ll revisit the Divinity School later.All right, so here once again is our same matrix with me and my pair, choosing actions Alpha and Beta, but this time I’m going to put numbers in here. And some of you will perhaps recognize these numbers, but that’s not really relevant for now. All right, so what’s the idea here? Well the first idea is that these numbers represent utiles or utilities. They represent what these people are trying to maximize, what they’re to achieve, their goals.The idea is - just to compare this to the outcome matrix - for the person who’s me here, (A,C) yields a payoff of–(A,C) is this box–so (A,C) yields a payoff of three, whereas (B-,B-) yields a payoff of 0, and so on. So what’s the interpretation? It’s the first interpretation: the natural interpretation that a lot of you jumped to straight away. These are people–people with these payoffs are people–who only care about their own grades. They prefer an A to a B+, they prefer a B+ to a B-, and they prefer a B- to a C. Right, I’m hoping I the grades in order, otherwise it’s going to ruin my curve at the end of the year. So these people only care about their own grades. They only care about their own grades.What do we call people who only care about their own grades? What’s a good technical term for them? In England, I think we refer to these guys - whether it’s technical or not - as “evil gits.” These are not perhaps the most moral people in the universe. So now we can ask a different question. Suppose, whether these are actually your payoffs or not, pretend they are for now. Suppose these are all payoffs. Now we can ask, not what did you do, but what should you do? Now we have payoffs that can really switch the question to a normative question: what should you do? Let’s come back to - was it Clara Elise–where was Clara Elise before? Let’s get the mike on you again. So just explain what you did and why again.Student: Why I chose Alpha?Professor Ben Polak: Yeah, stand up a second, if that’s okay.Student: Okay.Professor Ben Polak: You chose Alpha; I’m assuming these were roughly your payoffs, more or less, you were caring about your grades.Student: Yeah, I was thinking -Professor Ben Polak: Why did you choose Alpha?Student: I’m sorry?Professor Ben Polak: Why did you choose Alpha? Just repeat what you said before.Student: Because I thought the payoffs - the two different payoffs that I could have gotten–were highest if I chose Alpha.Professor Ben Polak: Good; so what Clara Elise is saying–it’s an important idea–is this (and tell me if I’m paraphrasing you incorrectly but I think this is more or less what you’re saying): is no matter what the other person does, no matter what the pair does, she obtains a higher payoff by choosing Alpha. Let’s just see that. If the pair chooses Alpha and she chooses Alpha, then she gets 0. If the pair chooses Alpha and she chose Beta, she gets -1. 0 is bigger than -1. If the pair chooses Beta, then if she chooses Alpha she gets 3, Beta she gets 1, and 3 is bigger than 1. So in both cases, no matter what the other person does, she receives a higher payoff from choosing Alpha, so she should choose Alpha. Does everyone follow that line of reasoning? That’s a stronger line of reasoning then the reasoning we had earlier. So the woman, I have immediately forgotten the name of, in the red shirt, whose name was -Student: Courtney.Professor Ben Polak: Courtney, so Courtney also gave a reason for choosing Alpha, and it was a perfectly good reason for choosing Alpha, nothing wrong with it, but notice that this reason’s a stronger reason. It kind of implies your reason.So let’s get some definitions down here. I think I can fit it in here. Let’s try and fit it in here.Definition: We say that my strategy Alpha strictly dominates my strategy Beta, if my payoff from Alpha is strictly greater than that from Beta, , regardless of what others do.Shall we just read that back? “We say that my strategy Alpha strictly dominates my strategy Beta, if my payoff from Alpha is strictly greater than that from Beta, regardless of what others do.” Now it’s by no means my main aim in this class to teach you jargon. But a few bits of jargon are going to be helpful in allowing the conversation to move forward and this is certainly one. “Evil gits” is maybe one too, but this is certainly one.Let’s draw out some lessons from this. Actually, so you can still read that, let me bring down and clean this board. So the first lesson of the class, and there are going to be lots of lessons, is a lesson that emerges immediately from the definition of a dominated strategy and it’s this. So Lesson One of the course is: do not play a strictly dominated strategy. So with apologies to Strunk and White, this is in the passive form, that’s dominated, passive voice. Do not play a strictly dominated strategy. Why? Somebody want to tell me why? Do you want to get this guy? Stand up - yeah.Student: Because everyone’s going to pick the dominant outcome and then everyone’s going to get the worst result - the collectively worst result.Professor Ben Polak: Yeah, that’s a possible answer. I’m looking for something more direct here. So we look at the definition of a strictly dominated strategy. I’m saying never play one. What’s a possible reason for that? Let’s - can we get the woman there?Student: Professor Ben Polak: ”You’ll always lose.” Well, I don’t know: it’s not about winning and losing. What else could we have? Could we get this guy in the pink down here?Student: Well, the payoffs are lower.Professor Ben Polak: The payoffs are lower, okay. So here’s an abbreviated version of that, I mean it’s perhaps a little bit longer. The reason I don’t want to play a strictly dominated strategy is, if instead, I play the strategy that dominates it, I do better in every case. The reason I never want to play a strictly dominated strategy is, if instead I play the strategy that dominates it, whatever anyone else does I’m doing better than I would have done. Now that’s a pretty convincing argument. That sounds like a convincing argument. It sounds like too obvious even to be worth stating in class, so let me now try and shake your faith a little bit in this answer.You’re somebody who’s wanted by the FBI, right?Okay, so how about the following argument? Look at the payoff matrix again and suppose I reason as follows. Suppose I reason and say if we, me and my pair, both reason this way and choose Alpha then we’ll both get 0. But if we both reasoned a different way and chose Beta, then we’ll both get 1. So I should choose Beta: 1 is bigger than 0, I should choose Beta. What’s wrong with that argument? My argument must be wrong because it goes against the lesson of the class and the lessons of the class are gospel right, they’re not wrong ever, so what’s wrong with that argument? Yes, Ale - yeah good.Student: Well because you have to be able to agree, you have to be able to speak to them but we aren’t allowed to show our partners what we wrote.Professor Ben Polak: All right, so it involves some notion of agreeing. So certainly part of the problem here, with the reasoning I just gave you–the reasoning that said I should choose Beta, because if we both reason the same way, we both do better that way–involves some kind of magical reasoning. It’s as if I’m arguing that if I reason this way and reason myself to choosing Beta, somehow I’m going to make the rest of you reason the same way too. It’s like I’ve got ESP or I’m some character out of the X-Men, is that what it’s called? The X-Men right? Now in fact, this may come as a surprise to you, I don’t have ESP, I’m not a character out of the X-Men, and so you can’t actually see brain waves emitting from my head, and my reasoning doesn’t affect your reasoning. So if I did reason that way, and chose Beta, I’m not going to affect your choice one way or the other. That’s the first thing that’s wrong with that reasoning. What else is wrong with that reasoning? Yeah, that guy down here.Student: Well, the second that you choose Beta then someone’s going - it’s in someone’s best interest to take advantage of it.Professor Ben Polak: All right, so someone’s going to take advantage of me, but even more than that, an even stronger argument: that’s true, but even a stronger argument. Well how about this? Even if I was that guy in the X-Men or the Matrix or whatever it was, who could reason his way into making people do things. Even if I could make everyone in the room choose Beta by the force of my brain waves, what should I then do? I should choose Alpha. If these are my payoffs I should go ahead and choose Alpha because that way I end up getting 3. So there’s two things wrong with the argument. One, there’s this magical reasoning aspect, my reasoning is controlling your actions. That doesn’t happen in the real world. And two, even if that was the case I’d do better to myself choose Alpha.So, nevertheless, there’s an element of truth in what I just said. It’s the fact that there’s an element of truth in it that makes it seem like a good argument. The element of truth is this. It is true that by both choosing Alpha we both ended up with B-’s. We both end up with payoffs of 0, rather than payoffs of 1. It is true that by both choosing, by both following this lesson and not choosing the dominated strategy Beta, we ended up with payoffs, (0,0), that were bad.And that’s probably the second lesson of the class. So Lesson 2, and this lesson probably wouldn’t be worth stating, if it wasn’t for sort of a century of thought and economics that said the opposite. So rational choice  rational choice can lead to outcomes that - what do Americans call this?–that ”suck.” If you want a more technical term for that (and you remember this from Economics 115), it can lead to outcomes that are “inefficient,” that are “Pareto inefficient,” but “suck” will do for today. Rational choices by rational players, can lead to bad outcomes.So this is a famous example for this reason. It’s a good illustration of this point. It’s a famous example. What’s the name of this example, somebody? This is called Prisoner’s Dilemma. How many of you have heard of the Prisoner’s Dilemma before? Most of you saw it in 115, why is it called the Prisoner’s Dilemma? Yes, the guy here in orange. That’s okay; he can just point at you that’s fine.Student: I think it’s whether or not the prisoner’s cooperate in the sentence they have, and if they kind of rat out the other person, then they can have less; but if both rat out, then they like end up losing large scale.Professor Ben Polak: Good, so in the standard story you’ve got these two crooks, or two accused crooks, and they’re in separate cells and they’re being interviewed separately–kept apart–and they’re both told that if neither of them rats the other guy out, they’ll go to jail for say a year. If they both rat each other out, they’ll end up in jail for two years, But if you rat the other guy out and he doesn’t rat you out, then you will go home free and he’ll go to jail for five years. Put that all down and you pretty quickly see that, regardless whether the other guy rats you or not, you’re better off ratting him out.Now, if you have never seen that Prisoner’s Dilemma, you can see it pretty much every night on a show called Law &amp; Order. How many of you have seen Law &amp; Order? If you haven’t seen Law &amp; Order, the way to see Law &amp; Order is to go to a random TV set, at a random time, and turn on a random channel. This happens in every single episode, so much so that if any of you actually - I mean this might actually be true at Yale–but if you any of you or the TV guys: if any of you know the guy who writes the plots for this, have him come to the class (so I guess to see the video now) and we get some better plot lines in there.But, of course, that’s not the only example. The grade game and this is not the only example. There are lots of examples of Prisoner’s Dilemmas out there. Let’s try and find some other ones. So how many of you have roommates in your college? How many of you have roommates? Most of you have roommates right? So I’m guessing now, I won’t make you show your hands, because it’s probably embarrassing, but what is the state of your dorm rooms, your shared dorm rooms, at the end of the semester or the end of the school year?So I’m just guessing, having been in a few of these things over the years, that by the end of the semester, or certainly by the end of the school year, the state of the average Yale dorm room is quite disgusting. Why is it disgusting? It’s disgusting because people don’t tidy up. They don’t clean up those bits of pizza and bits of chewed bread and cheese, but why don’t they tidy up?Well let’s just work it out. What would you like to happen if you’re sharing a dorm room? You’d like to have the other guy tidy up, right? The best thing for you is to have the other guy tidy up and the worst thing for you is to tidy up for the other guy. But now work it out: it’s a Prisoner’s Dilemma. If the other guy doesn’t tidy up, you’re best off not tidying up either, because the last thing you want is to be tidying up for the other guy. And if the other guy does tidy up, hey the room’s clean, who cares? So either way, you’re not going to tidy up and you end up with a typical Yale dorm room.Am I being unfair? Are your dorm rooms all perfect? This may be a gender thing but we’re not going to go there. So there are lots of Prisoner’s Dilemmas out there, anyone got any other examples? Other examples? I didn’t quite hear that, sorry. Let’s try and get a mike on it so we can really hear it.Student: Professor Ben Polak: Okay, in divorce struggles, okay. You’re too young to be worrying about such things but never mind. Yeah, okay, that’s a good example. All right, hiring lawyers, bringing in big guns. What about an Economics example? What about firms who are competing in prices? Both firms have an incentive to undercut the other firm, driving down profits for both. The last thing you want is to have the other firm undercut you, in an attempt to push prices down. That’s good for us the consumers, but bad for the firm, bad for industry profit. What remedies do we see? We’ll come back to this later on in the class, but let’s have a preview. So what remedies do we see in society for Prisoner’s Dilemmas? What kind of remedies do we see? Let me try and get the guy here right in front.Student: Collusion.Professor Ben Polak: Collusion; so firms could collude. So what prevents them from colluding? One thing they could do, presumably, is they could write a contract, these firms. They could say I won’t lower my prices if you don’t lower your prices, and they could put this contract in with the pricy lawyer, who’s taking a day off from the divorce court, and that would secure that they wouldn’t lower prices on each other. Is that right? So why wouldn’t that work? Why wouldn’t writing a contract here work? It’s against the law. It’s an illegal contract. What about you with your roommates? How many of you have a written contract, stuck with a magnet on the fridge, telling you, when you’re supposed to tidy up. Very few of you. Why do you manage to get some cooperation between you and your roommates even without a written contract?Student: It’s not legally enforceable.Professor Ben Polak: Well it probably is legally enforceable actually. This guy says not, but it probably is legally enforceable. He probably could have a written contract about tidying up. The woman in here.Student: Repetition; you do it over and over.Professor Ben Polak: Yeah, so maybe even among your roommates, maybe you don’t need a contract because you can manage to achieve the same ends, by the fact that you’re going to be interacting with the same person, over and over again during your time at Yale. So we’ll come back and revisit the idea that repeating an interaction may allow you to obtain cooperation, but we’re not going to come back to that until after the mid-term. That’s way down the road but we’ll get there.Now one person earlier on had mentioned something about communication. I think it was somebody in the front, right? So let’s just think about this a second. Is communication the problem here? Is the reason people behave badly–I don’t know “badly”–people choose Alpha in this game here, is it the fact that they can’t communicate? Suppose you’d been able to talk before hand, so suppose the woman here whose name was…?Student: Mary.Professor Ben Polak: …Mary, had been able to talk to the person next to her whose name is…?Student: Erica.Professor Ben Polak: Erica. And they said, suppose we know we’re going to be paired together, I’ll choose Beta if you choose Beta. Would that work? Why wouldn’t that work?Student: There’s no enforcement.Professor Ben Polak: There’s no enforcement. So it isn’t a failure of communication per se. A contract is more then communication, a contract is communication with teeth. It actually changes the payoffs. So I could communicate with Alice on agreements, but back home I’m going to go ahead and choose Alpha anyway; all the better if he’s choosing Beta. So we’ll come back and talk about more of these things as the course goes on, but let’s just come back to the two we forgot there: so the collusion case and the case back in Law &amp; Order with the prisoners in the cell. How do they enforce their contracts? They don’t always rat each other out and some firms manage to collude? How do they manage to enforce those contracts? Those agreements, how are they enforced?Student: They trust each other.Professor Ben Polak: It could be they trust each other, although if you trust a crook that’s not… What else could it be? The guy here again with the beard, yeah.Student: Could be a zero sum game.Professor Ben Polak: Well, but this is the game. So here’s the game.Student: No, but the pay, the way they value, the way of valuing each–Professor Ben Polak: Okay, so the payoffs may be different. I have something simpler in mind. Suppose they have a written contract, or even an unwritten contract, what enforces the contract for colluding firms or crooks in jail? Yeah.Student: Gets off Scott free in five years when the other guy gets out, he might run into a situation where Professor Ben Polak: Yeah, so a short version of that is, it’s a different kind of contract. If you rat someone out in jail, someone puts a contract out on you. Tony Soprano enforces those contracts. That’s the purpose of Tony Soprano. It’s the purpose of the mafia. The reason the mafia thrives in countries where it’s hard to write legal contracts–let’s say some new parts of the former Soviet Union or some parts of Africa–the reason the mafia thrives in those environments, is that it substitutes for the law and enforces both legal and illegal contracts.So I promised a while ago now, that we were going to come back and look at this game under some other possible payoffs. So I wasn’t under a contract but let’s come back and fulfill that promise anyway. So we’re going to revisit, if not the Divinity School, at least in people who have more morality than my friends up in the business school.We’re going to ask for the same grade game we played at the beginning. What would happen if player’s payoffs looked different? So these are “possible payoffs (2).” I’ll give these a name.. We called the other guys “evil gits.” We’ll call these guys “indignant angels.” I can never spell indignant.. Is that roughly right? Does that look right? I think it’s right. In-dig-nant isn’t it: indignant. Indignant angels, and we’ll see why in a second. So here are their payoffs and once again the basic structure of the game hasn’t changed. It’s still I’m choosing Alpha and Beta, my pair is choosing Alpha and Beta, and the grades are the same as they were before. They’re hidden by that board but you saw them before.But this time the payoffs are as follows. On the lead diagonal we still have (0,0) and (1,1). But now the grades here are -1–I’m sorry–the payoffs are -1 and -3, and here they’re -3 and -1. What’s the idea here? These aren’t the only other possible payoffs. It’s just an idea. Suppose I get an A and my pair gets a C, then sure I get that initial payoff of 3, but unfortunately I can’t sleep at night because I’m feeling so guilty. I have some kind of moral conscience and after I’ve subtracted off my guilt feelings I end up at -1, so think of this as guilt: some notion of morality.Conversely, if I chose a Beta and my pair chooses an Alpha, so I end up with a C and she ends up with an A, then you know I have a bad time explaining to my parents why I got a C in this class, and I have to say about how I’m going to be president anyway. But then, in addition, I feel indignation against this person. It isn’t just that I got a C; I got a C because she made me get a C, so that moral indignation takes us down to -3.So again, I’m not claiming these are the only other possible payoffs, but just another possibility to look at. So suppose these were the payoffs in the game. Again, suspend disbelief a second and imagine that these actually are your payoffs, and let me ask you what you would have done in this case. So think about it a second. Write it down. Write down what you’re going to do on the corner of your notepad. Just write down an Alpha or Beta: what you’re going to do here. You’re not all writing. The guy in the England shirt isn’t writing. You’ve got to be writing if you are in an England shirt.Show it to your neighbor. Let’s have a show of hands, again I want you to keep your hands up so that Jude can see it now. So how many of you chose Alpha in this case? Raise your hands. Come on, don’t be shy. Raise your hands. How many chose Beta in this case? How many people abstained? Not allowed to abstain: let’s try it again. Alpha in this case? No abstentions here. Beta in this case? So we’re roughly splitting the room. Someone who chose Alpha? Again: raise the Alpha’s again. Let me get this guy here. So why did you choose Alpha?Student: You would minimize your losses; you’d get 0 or -1 instead of -3 or 1.Professor Ben Polak: All right, so this gentleman is saying -Student: There’s no dominant strategy so -Professor Ben Polak: Right, so this gentleman’s saying, a good reason for choosing Alpha in this game is it’s less risky. The worst case scenario is less bad, is a way of saying it. What about somebody who chose Beta? A lot of you chose Beta. Let’s have a show of hands on the Beta’s again. Let me see the Beta’s again. So, raise your hands. Can we get the woman here? Can we ask her why she chose Beta?Student: Because if you choose Alpha, the best case scenario is you get 0, so that’s -Professor Ben Polak: Okay good, that’s a good counter argument. So the gentleman here was looking at the worst case scenario, and the woman here was looking at the best case scenario. And the best case scenario here looks like getting a 1 here. Now, let’s ask a different question. Is one of the strategies dominated in this game? No, neither strategy is dominated. Let’s just check. If my pair chooses Alpha, then my choosing Alpha yields 0, Beta -3: so Alpha would be better. But if my pair chooses Beta then Alpha yields -1, Beta yields 1: in this case Beta would be better. So Alpha in this case is better against Alpha, and Beta is better against Beta, but neither dominates each other.So here’s a game where we just change the payoffs. We have the same basic structure, the same outcomes, but we imagine people cared about different things and we end up with a very different answer. In the first game, it was kind of clear that we should choose Alpha and here it’s not at all clear what we can do–what we should do. In fact, this kind of game has a name and we’ll revisit it later on in the semester. This kind of game is called a “coordination problem.” We’ll talk about coordination problems later on.The main lesson I want to get out of this for today, is a simpler lesson. It’s the lesson that payoffs matter. We change the payoffs, we change what people cared about, and we get a very different game with a very different outcome. So the basic lesson is that payoffs matter, but let me say it a different way. So without giving away my age too much–I guess it will actually–when I was a kid growing up in England, there was this guy - there was a pop star–a slightly post-punk pop star called Joe Jackson, who none of you would have heard of, because you were all about ten years old, my fault. And Joe Jackson had this song which had the lyric, something like, you can’t get what you want unless you know what you want.As a statement of logic, that’s false. It could be that what you want just drops into your lap without you knowing about it. But as a statement of strategy, it’s a pretty good idea. It’s a good idea to try and figure out what your goals are–what you’re trying to achieve–before you go ahead and analyze the game. So payoffs matter. Let’s put it in his version. “You can’t get what you want, till you know what you want.”Be honest, how many of you have heard of Joe Jackson? That makes me feel old, oh man, okay. Goes down every year.So far we’ve looked at this game as played by people who are evil gits, and we’ve looked at this game as played by people who are indignant angels. But we can do something more interesting. We can imagine playing this game on a sort of mix and match. For example, imagine–this shouldn’t be hard for most of you–imagine that you are an evil git, but you know that the person you’re playing against is an indignant angel. So again, imagine that you know you’re an evil git, but you know that the person you’re playing against or with, is an indignant angel.What should you do in that case? What should we do? Who thinks you should choose Alpha in that case? Let’s pan the room again if we can. Keep your hands up so that you can see. Who thinks you should choose Beta in that case? Who’s abstaining here? Not allowed to abstain in this class: it’s a complete no-no. Okay, we’ll allow some abstention in the first day but not beyond today. Let’s have a look. Let’s analyze this combined game.So what does this game look like? It’s an evil git versus an indignant angel and we can put the payoff matrix together by combining the matrices we had before. So in this case, this is me as always. This is my pair, the column player. My payoffs are going to be what? My payoffs are going to be evil-git payoffs, so they come from the matrix up there. So if someone will just help me reading it off there. That’s a 0, a 3,a -1, and a 1. My opponent or my partner’s payoffs come from the indignant angel matrix. So they come from here. There’s a 0, a -3, a -1, and a 1.Everyone see how I constructed that? So just to remind you again, the first payoff is the row player’s payoff, in this case the evil git. And the second payoff is the column player’s payoff, in this case the indignant angel. Now we’ve set it up as a matrix, let’s try again that question I asked before. Suppose you’re the row player here. You’re the evil git. Those are your payoffs. You’re playing against an indignant angel, what would you do? So once again, no abstentions this time: who would choose Alpha? Let’s have a show of hands again, keep your hands up a second. Who would choose Beta? Very few Beta’s, but mostly Alpha’s. Alpha, I think, is the right answer here but why? Why is Alpha the right answer here? Yeah, can we get this guy here?Student: It’s the dominant strategy.Professor Ben Polak: Good. Actually nothing has changed from the game we started with. The fact that I changed the other guy’s payoffs didn’t matter here. Alpha was dominant before–it dominated Beta before–and it still dominates Beta. Let’s just check. If my opponent chooses Alpha and I choose Alpha, I get 0; Beta, I get -1. So Alpha would be better. If my opponent chooses Beta and I choose Alpha, I get 3; Beta, I get 1. Once again Alpha is better. So as before, Alpha does better than Beta for me, regardless of what the other person does. Alpha dominates Beta.What was the first lesson of the class? Shout it out please. Right, so you should all have been choosing in this game, you all should have chosen Alpha. So the one person who didn’t we’ll let him off for today. So Alpha dominates Beta here.Let’s flip things around. Suppose now–harder to imagine, but let’s try it–suppose now that you are an indignant angel and you’re playing against, and you know this, you’re playing against an evil git.You’re an indignant angel, so you have the payoffs that are still there and you’re playing against an evil git, which is the payoffs we covered up but we’ll reproduce them. Let’s produce that matrix. By the way, if this is beginning to sound like a wrestling match, I don’t mean it to. Let’s try here: Alpha, Beta, Alpha, Beta, pair, me. So my payoffs this time, are the indignant angel payoffs. So mine are 0, -1, -3, and 1. And my opponent’s payoffs are what would have been my payoffs before. They come from the other matrix. Let’s just show you it. They come from this matrix. So they’re going to be 0, -1, 3, 1.I took the second payoff from that matrix and made it the second payoff in this matrix. Everyone see how I did that? Once again, the row player is the first payoff and the column player is the other payoff. What should you do in this case? You’re the indignant angel. You’re playing against this evil git. What should you do? Write down on your notepad what you should do. Show it to your neighbor so you can’t cheat, or you can cheat but you’ll be shamed in front of your neighbor.Raise your hands. Let Jude see it. Raise your hands and keep them up if you chose Alpha now. How about if you chose Beta now? So one or two Beta’s, mostly Alpha’s. Well let’s see. Let’s reason this through a second. Does my Alpha dominate my Beta? No, in fact, Alpha doesn’t dominate Beta for me. It doesn’t dominate Beta. If my pair chooses Alpha then Alpha gets me 0; Beta -3. So Alpha does better. But if my pair chooses Beta, then Alpha gets me -1; Beta gets me 1. In this case Beta is better. As we saw before, Alpha is better against Alpha. Beta is better against Beta. There’s no dominance going on here. Nevertheless, at least 90% of you chose Alpha here, and that’s the right answer. Why? Why should you choose Alpha here? Somebody … can we get the guy with the beard here? Wait for the mike, great.Student: We had acknowledged that Alpha is a dominant strategy for my opponent so we must choose based upon, or knowing that my partner is going to choose Alpha.Professor Ben Polak: Good, and your name is?Student: Henry.Professor Ben Polak: Henry. So Henry is saying sure I don’t have a dominated strategy. My Alpha doesn’t dominate my Beta. But look at my opponent. My opponent’s Alpha dominates her Beta. If I choose Alpha and she chooses Alpha to get 0; Beta she gets -1. Alpha is better. If I choose Beta, if she chooses Alpha she gets 3; Beta 1. Again Alpha is better. For my opponent, Alpha dominates Beta. So by thinking about my opponent, by putting myself in my opponent’s shoes, I realize that she has a dominant strategy, Alpha. She’s going to choose Alpha and my best response against Alpha is to choose Alpha myself.So here, this time, my Alpha does not dominate Beta but my pair’s choice of Alpha dominates her choice, her possible choice of Beta. So she will choose Alpha. And once I know that she’s going to choose Alpha, it’s clear that I should choose Alpha and get 0 rather than Beta and get -3. So I should choose Alpha also.Okay, so now we’ve seen four different combinations. We’ve seen a case where an evil git was playing an evil git; where an indignant angel was playing an indignant angel; and we’ve seen both the flips of those: the evil git versus the indignant angel; and the indignant angel against the evil git. Why are we doing this? Because there’s an important lesson here. What’s the lesson here? The lesson is–comes from this game–that a great way to analyze games, a great way to get used to the idea of strategic thinking, perhaps even the essence of strategic thinking, is the ability to put yourself in someone else’s shoes, figure out what their payoffs are, and try and figure out what they’re going to do.So the big lesson of this game is–I forgot what number we’re up too–I guess this is Lesson 4 I think. Lesson 4 is: put yourself in others’ shoes and try to figure out what they will do. In a sense, this is the first difficult lesson of the class. It’s easy to spot when a strategy is dominant, more or less. It’s pretty easy to figure out, you have to know about your own payoffs. But the hard thing in life, is getting you to come out of your own selves a bit, realizing it’s “not all about you.” You’ve got to put yourself in other people’s shoes to figure out what they care about and what they’re going to try and do, so you can respond well to that.While we’re here, let’s just mention that things will get more complicated in a world where I don’t actually know the payoffs of my opponent. It’s much easier to figure out my own payoffs than to figure out my opponent’s payoffs. I might not know whether I’m playing someone who’s an evil git or an indignant angel. So I’m going to have to figure out what the odds are of that in doing this exercise. And we’re going to come back to that idea too way at the end of the class, but that’s getting a bit ahead of ourselves, but we’ll get there.Now, it turns out that this game, this Prisoner’s Dilemma, with the Alpha’s and Beta’s, or essentially the same game, has been played many, many, many times in experiments. So out there in the real world–I think we can do this here–out there in the real world when they do these experiments, they find out that roughly 70% of people choose Alpha and roughly 30% choose Beta. Roughly, almost a third choose Beta. What do we think is going on? That’s a third of the people who seem to be choosing a dominated strategy … or is it? What’s going on there? Why do you think 30% of people are choosing Beta? Anybody? Can we catch this guy here?Student: They might be motivated by the fact that every person who chooses Beta raises the average score.Professor Ben Polak: They could be moral people. So one possibility is: this 30% of people in the real world who choose Beta are just nice people. What else could it be? Yeah?Student: I know this might be changing the game a little bit, but if you ever expected to play the same game with the partner you have more Professor Ben Polak: All right, they could be thinking they’re going to play again.Student:  long run payoffs are greater if you choose Beta every time.Professor Ben Polak: So it could be that they think that this is actually–they haven’t understood the experiment and they think this is a multi shot game, not a one shot game, good. What else could it be? What’s the simplest explanation? What’s the other obvious explanation? They could just be stupid, right? It could be., Are we allowed to say that in class?Let’s be honest here, when we say experiments in the real world in Game Theory–or the ones you read about in The New York Times–the real world when it comes to experiments in Economics really means undergraduates at the University of Arizona. I mean, I’m not making it up. It just does. They all are. I don’t know anything about … are any of you from Arizona, I don’t know. I don’t know whether the average undergrad at the University of Arizona just has a sunny personality or whether they “spent too long in the sun.” I just don’t know which it is, right? We can’t really distinguish from this.How about at Yale. What’s our numbers here. How about in this class? Do you want to mike your colleague here? So 238 at Yale–this is Yale–versus 36. So even at my level of arithmetic that’s a lot less than 30%. That’s more like less than 15%. It’s about 15% I guess. So 236–I’m sorry 238–chose Alpha, and 36 chose Beta. Now there’s one more lesson in this class and this is going to be it. This isn’t the end of the class but one more lesson to take home. You guys are going to be playing games among each other today and until–whatever it is?–December 7, whatever is the end of term. Look around each other. You better get to know each other a bit. And what did we learn today about you guys?The lesson here, Lesson 5, is “Yale students are evil.” Be aware of that when you’re playing games.I want to play one more game today in the remaining minutes. It doesn’t matter if we finish a little bit early, but I want to try to get this game at least started. So do you all have Game #2 in front of you? Just while you’re reading that over, can I also make sure you’ve all got your legal forms and you’re going to sign. Don’t walk away with your legal forms, we need to get those collected in. So at the end of talking about this game, I’m going to collect in both the second game for the class and also the legal form. If you don’t have a legal form, if you’ve lost it or something, it’s online.Let’s have a look at that second game. I’ll read it out for you. Game 2: “pick a number.” Everyone got this? Anyone not got this? Everyone got it? Good.“Without showing your neighbor what you’re doing, put in the box below a whole number between 1 and a 100  We will calculate the average number chosen in the class. The winner in this game is the person whose number is closest to two-thirds times the average in the class.”  The winner will win $5 minus the difference in pennies between her choice and that two-thirds of the average.”Just to make sure you’ve understood this, let me do an example on the board. I’ve got one more board; that’s good. So imagine there were three people in the class, and imagine that they chose 25, 5, and 60. So 25 plus 5 plus 60 is 90. People should feel free to correct my arithmetic because it’s often wrong; 90 right? Two-thirds of 90, whoops, what do I need, start again. I need to divide it by three to get the average. So the average is 30. So the total is 90, the average is 30, am I right so far? So two-thirds of the average is 20. I’m looking desperately at the T.A. Is that right? Okay, so the average is 30 and two-thirds of the average is 20.So who’s the winner here, which number would have won here? 25 would have won. 25 would have been the closest, and what would they have won? They would have won five bucks minus five cents for a total of four ninety-five. Now to make this interesting, let’s play this for real. So this of course relies on me having brought some money and we’ll have to do this without dislodging the microphone. So I’m going to see if I have… sorry about that. I’m going to see if I have enough money to do this in class for real. When we played this game in the old days, during the dot com boom with the MBA students, you had to put fifty dollars on the table to get them interested. Graduate students: five cents will do it.Okay, so this is a–there’s some bloke with a beard on this one. Yeah this is Lincoln apparently. Who knew, Lincoln? Okay, so this is a five-dollar note and I’m going to put it–sorry about that again–I’m going to put it in an envelope. I’m not cheating anybody? No magic tricks here. And this is going to be the prize for this game and we better give this to someone we trust. It’s the prize for 159.Who do you guys trust? The camera guy. Okay Jude: we know Jude’s going to be there next week. I’m giving it to Jude. You can’t see this on camera.–people at home–but I’m giving it to Jude okay. I’m going to put it here, and Jude has to show up next week with the prize. I thought we should give it to the guy at the back, who is the moral guy. Who is our moral guy at the back? Well never mind, we will give it to Jude. We know Jude’s going to be here. All right, has everyone put a number down? Any questions? Just shout them out to me.Student: So given that we only have one five dollar bill does there have to be one unique winner, and if so, how is that determined if we have multiple people who are -Professor Ben Polak: That’s a good question. If there’s multiple winners, we’ll divide it but we’ll make sure everyone has a positive winning. Good question. Given the number of people in the room there may be multiple winners, I accept that possibility. Has everyone written down a number now? All right, so hand your numbers to the end of the row, but don’t go yet. Hand it on to the end of the row. Before you go I want five things from you. I want to know the five lessons from this class. Tell me what you learnt? What were the five lessons? Without looking at your notes, what were the five lessons? Anybody, shout out one of the lessons, yes madam.Student: Don’t play a strictly dominated strategy.Professor Ben Polak: Don’t play a strictly dominated strategy, anything else? Yes sir.Student: Yale students are evil.Professor Ben Polak: Yale students are evil. Two lessons down, three to go. The guy over here.Student: Rational choices can lead to bad outcomes.Professor Ben Polak: Rational choices can lead to bad outcomes. We put it more graphically before but that’s fine. Two more outcomes.Student: Put yourself in other people’s shoes.Professor Ben Polak: Put yourself in other people’s shoes and I’m missing one, I can’t recall which one I’m missing now.Student: You can’t get what you want so you -Professor Ben Polak: You can’t get what you want. You could but it’s a good idea to figure out what you want before you try and get what you want. Five things you learnt today, hand in your numbers and the legal forms and I’ll see you on Monday.