Professor Joanne Freeman: Now, I’m looking out at all of these faces and I’m assuming that many of you have probably arrived here with some preconceived notions about the American Revolution. I’m assuming that at least some of you are sitting there and in the back of your mind you’re thinking — Declaration of Independence, a bunch of battles, George Washington, a little bit of Paul Revere thrown in — and all of those things are going to appear in the course but obviously the real American Revolution is a lot more complex than that. It’s more than a string of names and documents and battles, and as a matter of fact in many ways the American Revolution wasn’t just a war. If you went back to the mid-eighteenth century, went back to the period of the Revolution or maybe just after it, and you asked people how they understood what was happening, many of them would tell you that the war was actually only a minor part of the American Revolution. Some would tell you the war actually wasn’t the American Revolution at all and you’ll see the — I should mention that the syllabus is finally up online so it’s there for you, but you will see when you look at the syllabus that at the very start of it there are two quotes and I want to read them here because they make this point really well.So the first quote is from a letter by John Adams and he’s writing to Thomas Jefferson in 1815 and he’s heard about an attempt to write the history of the American Revolution so this is what Adams has to say about that. “As to the history of the Revolution, my ideas may be peculiar, perhaps singular, but what do we mean by the Revolution? The war? That was no part of the Revolution.” There is the moment where you go “Huh?” “It was only an effect and consequence of it. The Revolution was in the minds of the people, and this was effected from 1760 to 1775, in the course of fifteen years before a drop of blood was drawn at Lexington.”Okay. So there we have John Adams saying that the war was actually no part of the Revolution. It’s a pretty famous quote but it’s a pretty interesting statement. Now I want to mention here, and it’s very early in the course for me to have worked you in to liking John Adams and I’m going to talk more about John Adams in a few minutes, but I will mention here since I’ve just read that quote if partway through the semester you decide you’re just dying to read dead people’s mail, which is basically what historians do for a living, a great volume to read is actually the letters that Jefferson and Adams sent back and forth to each other over the course of their lives. They’ve all been pulled together into one volume and the best part of that volume is the end section, the letters in which these guys were writing to each other in their old age. So you have these two Founder figures, former presidents, and they’re just basically letting it rip in these letters. They’re talking about everything. They’re talking about all the things actually you probably wouldn’t talk about normally: religion, politics, who they hate, who they like, what they thought of the Revolution, what they thought of their own presidency, what they thought of the other guy’s presidency, the top ten Founder funerals. Actually, there’s a little section, although I think it’s the top three Founder funerals, but it’s a weird, really interesting range of stuff and it’s just these two people really excited about the fact that they’ve retired and all they need to do now is write to each other and really get to know each other better. So it’s a great volume. It’s edited by Lester Cappon. The last name is C-a-p-p-o-n if you’re interested.Okay. So that quote I just read you is actually from that series of letters, Adams saying that the war was no part of the Revolution. Adams does say, “Well, maybe my ideas are a little bit peculiar” but he’s not the only one spouting that kind of thought. So here is Benjamin Rush, who I guess in a way you could say was doctor to the stars. He was actually this renowned doctor from the revolutionary and early national period and he had a lot of high-placed political friends. So here’s Benjamin Rush writing in 1787: “There is nothing more common than to confound the terms of the American Revolution with those of the late American war. The American war is over but this is far from being the case with the American Revolution. On the contrary, nothing but the first act of this great drama is closed.” So there you have Benjamin Rush saying that boy, this is a common problem. A lot of people mix up American Revolution with American war and they’re not just one and the same thing. The war is over. The Revolution goes on, and Rush is saying this even as late as 1787. It’s four years after the treaty that ended the war, we’re heading in to Constitution territory, and to Rush, the Revolution is continuing.So what do these people mean? Well, in part, they are expressing part of what this class is going to be exploring. They’re basically suggesting that the American Revolution represented an enormous change of mindset as loyal British colonists — right? — long-standing loyal British colonists, were transformed gradually into angry revolutionaries and ultimately into Americans. Like John Adams suggests, the beginnings of this transformation predate the actual fighting, and like Benjamin Rush suggests, it doesn’t just come to a close when you sign a peace treaty. So when you look at things from this broad view, the Revolution actually becomes the beginning of a period in which the American nation was really inventing itself, and this is a really dramatic kind of invention. You have — In a sense we’re just little pipsqueaks at this point, and so you have these little pipsqueaks and they are actually saying, “Okay. We reject monarchy. We’re going to turn towards a democratic republic.” They’re saying, “Yeah. Well, we know the power’s been at the imperial center forever. We’re going to turn our backs on that and pull power in to what’s basically the margins of the British empire.” They’re turning away from an assumption that the few are in power and they’re saying, “Well, what if we try putting the many in power?”Those are pretty dramatic changes and they aren’t of course the only changes. People — Colonists began to think about themselves differently. It’s really easy to underestimate the degree to which individual colonies at that time were really like little independent nation-state colonies. They were not united in any sense of the term. There wasn’t any tradition of colonies being able to communicate between each other. It was actually in some ways easier to communicate with the mother country than to get some kind of news up and down the Atlantic seaboard. Colonists often knew more about the mother country than they knew about people from other colonies. They — When you look at correspondence from this period, people often refer — Northerners will refer to Southerners as though they’re people from a strange, alien country who have weird accents. It’s hard to know what they are saying; they dress so strangely. It’s amazing to think about the differences, the degree to which colonies really stood alone in this time period. And this idea, that there really is pretty much no reason to assume that these colonies would have been able to join together, that’s pretty much going to be in the first two or three lectures of the course. What we talk about is we try and get a sense of who these colonists are, and how they’re ending up moving their way into a revolution. So this scattered group of independent colonists gradually came together to form one united nation, not the goal but the outcome.Given everything that I just said, you can see why this idea that there might be a united nation is actually a pretty big surprise. You can see why a lot of people assumed that it could never work. You can actually also assume why a lot of people might not even have liked it as an idea, and you can even see why after the Constitution goes into effect and the government is getting under way, even then people were really just not sure this thing was going to work. They really — They referred to it as an experiment, which is really how they viewed it. And it’s amazing when you look at letters from the 1790s you’ll see these little throwaway comments like “If this government lasts more than five years, here’s what I think we should do.” Okay, there — It’s a completely weird mindset and it’s not something that we would assume is there, but this is pretty much a high-stakes experiment.So this class is going to explore this big shift in mindset, and the war will be at the center of this shift, and it’s going to do this from a participant’s point of view. It’s going to really grapple with how things made sense at the time to the people who were there. And I’m going to go more in to that in a minute or two.I want to talk for just a second about how the course is organized and just for a minute or two about some of the readings for the course. The course is partly chronological and partly thematic so we do proceed along, we follow the narrative of events of how things evolved, all those nasty acts, people protesting, have a war, try to figure out what to do after the war. We do follow that sort of trajectory, but we’re also going to once in a while step back and look at the big picture, so that we’re not just following events; we’re going to be always putting events in context.And the readings for the course go in that same direction. We’re going to read Gordon Wood’s Radicalism of the American Revolution, which is a really great overview of this time period and also presents an argument, obviously as you could tell from the title, that the Revolution was really radical. Some people agree with that and some disagree, and actually one of the discussion sections is geared around discussing that very idea, and by the end of the course you’ll probably have some pretty strong ideas not necessarily agreeing with mine but, based on what you’ve read and what I’ve said and what you’ve thought, you’ll probably have some strong ideas about how radical was the American Revolution.We’re going to be reading Robert Gross’s The Minutemen and Their World, which you can hear is right along the lines of what I was just saying. It really gives you a sense of what it was like at the time for people who ended up doing things like fighting at Lexington and Concord.We’re going to read Bernard Bailyn’s Faces of Revolution, which includes an array of chapters on different people who played a major role in the Revolution as well as chapters on the ideals and the ideology or basically the logic of American independence, and Bailyn is really well known as sort of — He wrote this amazing book on the ideology of the American Revolution, and what you’re going to be reading; he basically took a big, meaty chunk from that book, the part that everybody really focuses on, and put it in this book, Faces of Revolution, so we will be reading that as well as part of the readings for the course.We’re also going to be reading Ray Raphael’s A People’s History of the American Revolution, which does just what the title would suggest. It does — It looks at how different kinds of people, Native Americans, average rebels, African Americans, Loyalists, women, how all of these different people of different types experienced the Revolution.And then in addition to reading historical scholarship, we’re going to be reading some of the literature of the period. We’re going to be reading Thomas Paine’s Common Sense, which I love. How many of you have read Common Sensebefore? A good number of you, not — yeah, some of you. I love Common Sense. I think it’s an amazing piece of writing, and I think when you read it for this course you’ll get a sense of why it had such a huge influence at the time.We’re going to read some essays from The Federalist written by Alexander Hamilton and James Madison and John Jay, but we are not going to read them as — You may have read them before. You may have encountered The Federalistessays as the grand source of authority on the Constitution. Right? How could it not be that when you have Founder-type guys talking about the Constitution and they were the guys who were at the convention? Well, the fact of the matter is The Federalist essays weren’t intended to be an objective document. They’re actually really subjective, and we’re going to look at them in this course as what they were written to be, which is a really big commercial advertisement for this new experimental Constitution. They were actually trying to sell people on an idea, and because of that, as we’ll see when we read that for this course, there are things in there that maybe are a little bit exaggerated and things in there that maybe aren’t talked about in great detail and one or two things that probably aren’t really true but it was in a good cause. Right? These guys are saying, “I really think this Constitution is the way to go. Let me say something that’s going to really calm you so that we can go ahead with this experiment.”And of course we’re going to be reading the Declaration of Independence. We’re going to be reading the Constitution. We’re going to be reading a lot of documents and letters and other kinds of assorted items to really give us a sense of the period, and at one point I’m even going to bring in a newspaper from the period so that we can actually look at it and get a sense of how people are getting news of the war at that moment. A lot of these documents we’re going to pull from a book called Major Problems in the Era of the American Revolution, and it’s a nice collection of primary documents and essays about sort of related themes. It always makes me laugh when I say that title because it’s part of a series of books and the books are Major Problems in the Revolution, Major Problems in the Early National Period, Major Problems in the Civil War, so basically all of American history appears to be a major problem,  which — It kind of gives me pause, but despite that, it’s a nice collection of things and we’ll be using that for the class.So that gives you a sense of how the course is going to flow and what these readings are going to do, which brings me to the portion of the lecture that I’m going to call Freeman’s Top Five Tips for Studying the American Revolution, and I want to explain before I launch into them what the heck I mean. Basically, when I was preparing this lecture and thinking to myself what do I want you to know about right at the outset before we even start talking about the Revolution itself. And I ended up with a list of things that as I talk about them here may seem obvious, but the more I talk about them I think the less obvious they’ll appear, and they’re actually really important to consider in a course that deals with something like America’s founding. There’s a lot wrapped up in that. Just that phrase. Just think about the phrase — right? — the ‘Founding Fathers,’ the ‘Founding Period.’ You just can see the capital letters.  You don’t even need to see it in writing. In your mind it’s always capitalized. We assume a lot of things about this time period, and it’s sort of an iconic period when you think about American history.To us, a lot of the people and events of this time period and the documents of this time period are kind of what America is all about, which is understandable, but to think about the founding period as historians, we need to think differently. We need to be aware of all of those assumptions, all of that cultural baggage that we bring when we’re looking at something like the American Revolution, we need to be aware of them, and then we need to get past them so that we can really begin to understand the people and events of the Revolution for what they were. And that’s how I got to Freeman’s Top Five Tips for Studying the American Revolution; five things that you should bear in mind when studying this period, five things obviously that will be useful to remember throughout the course, basically all of them aimed at just shaking the assumptions right out of us. And the first tip is actually really related to that point.The first tip is: Avoid the dreaded Revolutionary War fact bubble. And what I mean by that is you’re going to be sitting here and over the course of the semester you’re going to hear a lot of familiar names and events, Boston Tea Party, George Washington, the greatest hits of the Revolution, the things you know and love and learned in high school. They’re all going to be here and hearing all of these beloved greatest hits you may be tempted to sort of sit back in your seat and drift along with the happy, familiar events. Aaah, the story of the American Revolution; I love the story of the American Revolution. Well, I love the story of the American Revolution but there’s a different story of the American Revolution besides all these names, facts, and dates that you probably have arrived here with in your head. It’s a really good dramatic story but it’s not a string of facts, so thus the fact bubble. It’s not a fact bubble. The Revolution obviously is a lot more than that and you need to sort of almost be aware of the fact and then allow yourself to step back and look at the big picture. And John Adams and Benjamin Rush and others like them would have been the first to tell you the facts in a sense are the least of it.So that’s — Tip number one is don’t get lost in the dreaded Revolutionary War fact bubble, which I have to say it makes me think of the first time that I taught this course. I was actually a brand new professor and I had just come to Yale and it was my first course and it was my first lecture in my first course and I’m  It actually was in Connecticut Hall, which, for those of you who don’t know, dates back to the period when this course is talking about and was Nathan Hale’s — essentially his dorm. So there I am. I’m a brand new professor to Yale and I’m teaching a course about the Revolution and it’s in a building that dates to the Revolution, so I’m having sort of a “wow” Yale moment as it is, and I’m off, I’m giving my lectures, and I’m really excited. I give about three of them and someone raises their hand after about three lectures and they have kind of a puzzled expression on their face. I said, “Yes?” And he says, “Excuse me, Professor Freeman. What are we supposed to be memorizing? Where are the facts and dates?”  So as a new professor my first impulse was: Darn! I forgot the facts and dates.  I got it wrong.  But actually, the fact of the matter is, they’re not the star of the show. Certainly, dates are not the star of the show. There are dates you’re going to have to remember so don’t think Easy Street; there’s not a date I have to know. There will be some dates, but this isn’t a story about dates. It’s obviously something a lot more interesting and a lot broader than that. Okay. Avoid fact bubble.Tip number two: Think about the meaning of words. Now on the one hand, this may seem really obvious and you may be sitting here thinking oh, great, this is going to be a semester of Freeman saying: “What does revolution mean? What does war mean?”, which would be a really, really, really long semester, and that’s actually maybe — There might even be a point where I’ll say, “What does revolution mean?” I even kind of, sort of said it already, but that’s not what I mean when I say think about the meaning of words. What I really mean here is be careful what you assume about words because what seems obvious in meaning to you now probably meant something really different in 1776 or 1787, and I want to look at one example because it’s a really striking one and that’s the word “democracy.” Okay. So sitting here in this room, by our standards, democracy is a good thing. Right? Democracy is a good thing. Every once in a while as a professor you say something and then you think with horror about how it’s going to look in your notes. So you’ll have all these notes, and then it will say “democracy is a good thing,”  — a really sophisticated class we’re teaching here at Yale. But to us it’s good, and to people in the founding generation, not so much. They weren’t so sure about it. To them the word “democracy” signaled a kind of government in which every single person participated personally, not a government based on representation. We’re talking mass politics, in the minds of most people in the founding generation just the definition of what chaos was.So just listen to a sentence in one of the last letters written by Alexander Hamilton, 1804, the night before his duel with Aaron Burr. So he’s sort of speaking to posterity in case he should die and this is what he writes in this letter. “I will here express but one sentiment, which is that the dismemberment of our empire” — I love the fact that America’s an empire in 1804 — “will be a clear sacrifice of great positive advantages without any counterbalancing good, administering no relief to our real disease, which is democracy.” Okay. Our real disease is democracy, Alexander Hamilton.Now admittedly, Hamilton might not be the shining example of the point I’m trying to make here because he’s not exactly Mr. Democracy so you wouldn’t really expect him to be clapping his hands for it. But now listen to Thomas Jefferson, who maybe you would brand Mr. Democracy. So Jefferson in 1816 is chatting away with someone in a letter about what America’s trying to do and whether America’s actually achieving it, and he says, ‘Actually, democracy is pretty impractical.’ He can imagine it in a town but outside of one town it just won’t work; again, really clear. Their sense of what that word means is really different from our sense of what that word means. Now Jefferson immediately goes on to add that democratical — a democratical but representative government is a good thing. Right? A democracy, not so much, but democratical, which is a great — In the eighteenth century they were always adding “ical” on to the end of things, which could end perfectly happily with a “c.”  This is a great eighteenth-century-sounding word, “democratical.” A democratical representative government is a good thing, but democracy not.So the moral of this story is don’t fall in to what I call ‘democraspeak.’ Don’t write papers where you toss around terms like “democracy,” “liberty,” “freedom,” without really thinking about what you mean and what they meant. As Americans we’re used to tossing those words around, but to early Americans, if you think about it, to early American slave holders, words like “liberty,” other such words, have a much more complicated meaning.So tip number two: Think about the meaning of words. Which brings us to tip number three: Remember that Founders were people. Now as I was writing this I thought oh, that’s another one of those things I don’t want to see in people’s notes:  Democracy is good, Founders are people.  Such a highfalutin’ course I’m teaching here. Again it sounds really obvious, but what I really mean here is we tend to forget this pretty simple fact.We forget that the Founders were people. We assume that they were these all-knowing demigods who were sort of calmly walking their way through the creation of a new model nation. We kind of deify them. We put them up on this sort of — aah — founder mountaintop of American history, and it’s — really it’s easy to do. Sometimes just listening to their words or reading their words would inspire you to want to do that. Here is a random phrase. I thought what could I write here that would be sort of inspiring Founder talk and this was the one — two sentences that I came up with just because they always stick in my mind because they sound kind of amazing. This is actually Thomas Paine, Common Sense. In the middle of it he writes, “We have it in our power to begin the world over again. The birthday of a new world is at hand.”Okay. That’s really — That’s inspiring stuff. That’s fine writing, but that’s inspiring talk and it’s supposed to be obviously because Paine’s trying to convince people that independence is a really good idea, but these kinds of words, this sort of glorious rhetoric, shouldn’t block out the simple fact that the Founders were people. They were regular human beings. They were well educated, they were thoughtful, they were sometimes well-meaning, they were sometimes hard-working, maybe sometimes not so much, they were people aiming high, they were people who did feel responsible to posterity, but still they were people.And to me this is one of the really exciting things about history generally and about this time period specifically. We’re talking about people trying to figure things out. We’re talking about the most basic things about America — right? — its existence,  that it is a nation, that it has a constitution, and we’re looking at people trying to figure out how all that stuff is going to be created and how it’s going to work. These are people who are scared. These are people who make dumb mistakes on occasion. They’re figuring it out as they go.The history of this period is a history of decisions of various kinds, and these were hard decisions and they were being made by people who did not know the answers. They’re making it up as they go along. I think that’s just fascinating when you just read their correspondence and get a sense of how much they’re really in the dark. There’s — Actually, when you read letters from the period, a lot of them say the same thing right when the government launches. I think George Washington and James Madison and a Pennsylvania senator almost say the exact same thing. It’s almost like they went in to a room and said, “So how will we express being scared at this moment? Aah, here’s a good sentence.” They all say basically, “I feel like I’m walking on hollow ground. I feel like the ground’s going to break beneath my feet.” They’ve just launched this Constitution and they all are sort of standing there on the national stage thinking, what if this all explodes? Do we actually know what we’re doing? That’s a really fascinating part of this period to me.Now of course sometimes people did try to figure out the answers in a wonderful sort of Enlightenment way, and my favorite example of this is James Madison who prepared himself ultimately for the Constitutional Convention by studying all governments across all time.  Can you imagine? Well, I’d better go study all of government ever  to get ready for this convention, but he does. It’s a great sort of Enlightenment thing to do. He’s thinking I will now discover the eternal pattern of politics and he’s thinking if I can do that then I can reach for the best, I can avoid the worst, and whatever we’re going to do when we make a new government maybe we’re going to actually do something better than what’s come before. So there’s a logic to it; as ambitious as it is there’s a logic. And he was serious about it so it wasn’t even just I wonder what happens if I read a lot about government. He actually was serious about it. He even made a kind of a little chart in which he listed the governments and then listed pros and cons. You know, like what did I think of Sparta? He’s sort of  amazing, across all time, so I love the fact that he did that Founder-like thing to do, but there you see a person, a really intellectually ambitious person, trying to figure things out like how do we know what to make?  What’s this constitution supposed to look like? How are we going to figure that out? Okay. I’ll just study all of government and let you know.So when we talk about the American Revolution we’re talking about people and this course takes this idea really seriously. Part of what we’re going to be doing over the course of the semester is looking at the Revolution from the vantage point of participants, trying to see how people at the time understood the events unfolding around them. How did the colonists understand themselves as British subjects? How did they feel about the British empire or about the King or about Parliament? How did they come to put American-ness in the foreground? How did rebelling against their own country make sense?And that’s something I think we also tend to forget about the Revolution. We think of it as our war; it’s us against them and them equals the British, but of course we were the British. So it’s something that you don’t think about but people at the time, certainly in the 1790s, people referred to this as “the Civil War” because that’s what it was. It’s just not the way we happen to think about it because in our mind we’ve already traveled down the road and we’re already “us” but in their mind it was in a sense brother against brother; it was us against us. So we’re going to try to keep that sort of thing in mind as we explore how the events of this time made sense at that time. And I will say here we are not going to forget about the British so we’re not going to have a patriot-centric course. The British have a logic to what they’re doing, whether they’re making policy or whether they’re fighting battles, and we will definitely look at the logic of what the British are doing as well as what the colonists are doing.Now I will admit right here up front that I will be offering you a sampling of really arrogant British quotes about crude colonists, and I’m doing that partly because there’s just so many good, really arrogant quotes about  American colonists that I can’t resist sprinkling them through my lectures and I can’t resist that so much that I have two here that I just randomly added in because I have a reason to and so I will. But it’s just — it gives you a sense of how at least some of the British were thinking and looking at really these little upstarts on the margins of empire. So random arrogant British quote number one, and this is from a customs official: “American colonists are a most rude, depraved, degenerate race, and it is a mortification to us that they speak English and can trace themselves from that stock.”  Wow.  Just — Even English is a problem. That’s a statement.Okay. Arrogant quote number two, and this one I picked just because it’s about George Washington, and it’s hard to imagine people saying something arrogant about George Washington who seems to be Mr. Symbol of Authority, but here’s another British official who met with George Washington and then wrote back home about what he thought. And he says, “Somehow, and I can’t imagine how, he’s learned the basics of how to behave in a court society.” It’s like, ‘ooh.’  That must have been a really fun interview, too, if that’s the attitude this guy had. So there’ll be a sprinkling of that because at dramatic moments in the war there’s always someone who steps forward and offers that point of view.That said, we are going to do justice to the British side of the dispute, to the logic behind the policy that they were making, because it’s not as though they make a bunch of dumb policies that make absolutely no sense and we’re righteously outraged and then there’s a war. Their policies made sense to them. They didn’t happen to always make sense to the colonists but they made sense to them, and the same thing goes with British battle plans which, looking back in the long view of time when we start talking about them, might seem a little goofy but there’s actually a lot of logic for what they were trying to do when they were attacking the colonies.Oh, and I will also mention — I guess I probably don’t have time to talk about it now. When I was preparing this lecture, casting around, trying to figure out what will I put in the lecture, I don’t know how I came across it but I discovered the Battle of New Haven. Did anyone know about the Battle of New Haven? Because I did not know. And I know there’s hostilities around — and I don’t know if there’s Yale lore that of course you’re all sitting there saying, “Well, of course we all know about the Battle of New Haven,”  but I —  I’m the only one who doesn’t know about the Battle of New Haven, but it’s — actually it’s a good story. I’m not going to tell it now. I’m going to leave you in suspense. It will appear when we start getting in to the fighting of the Revolution, but let me just give you the sneak preview, which is it does involve the president  of Yale College with a gun in his hand running to fight the British, so it’s  a Yale moment that we have, so I will talk about the Battle of New Haven.Okay. So we aren’t going to be looking at a story of good guys versus bad guys. We will be reconstructing opposing points of view, trying to figure out how those points of view made sense and then obviously we’ll be able to step back and say, “What happens when you put those two opposing points of view in contact with each other?”So tip three: Founders are people. Which brings us to tip four: We’re not just talking about Founders. The Revolution was not just a quiet conversation between a bunch of guys wearing wigs and knee britches. Right? We sort of have this image that the Revolution is guys in short pants with wigs in a room doing this.  No.  That’s the entire founding I think in our minds sort of. I’ll say that right. So that’s not the Revolution. Right? That’s not what happened. We’re talking about a revolution, a popular uprising by vast numbers of colonists fought on American ground by Americans of all kinds, and it meant different things to different kinds of people. This is not to say that the Founders aren’t important, far from it, and as you will gather very quickly in this course I love these guys. Right? I love talking about these guys, I love writing about these guys, so I’m certainly not saying, “Who cares about Founders?”But what I am saying is that they’re not the only ones who mattered. They didn’t have their own revolution while everybody else watched. We’re talking about a popular revolution grounded on the ideas and actions of people throughout many different levels of society. Now somewhat conversely this brings us to John Adams. As I promised at the beginning, John Adams is coming and here’s John Adams. You’ll be hearing from him more than once this semester and actually you already heard from him once so I can promise that that’s true. This isn’t because I think that John Adams is the most important figure from the period. It’s not because I think that he’s always right. In fact, the reason I quote him a lot is he’s a brilliant, blunt, really direct commentator with — and this is all-important; you almost need a drum roll here — he has a sense of humor. John Adams has a sense of humor. It’s not every day that you find a Founder with a sense of humor.  I can vouch. There aren’t a lot of chuckling Founders. Certainly on paper there’s not a lot of chuckling going on among the Founders. Probably in person there was, but on paper not a lot of them commit humor to paper and John Adams does. He’s even self-deprecating sometimes, which — Nobody wants to be self-deprecating on paper when they know that they’re going to be a Founder, but John Adams sometimes is, and I’m going to offer one little, tiny dumb example, the first thing that popped in to my mind when I thought, ‘well, what am I going to say to show John Adams’ sense of humor?’So this is actually from that same series of letters in their old age when they’re writing back and forth to each other. So Adams is writing to Jefferson and he signs his letter with this: “John Adams in the eighty-ninth year of his age, too fat to last much longer,”  which is not typical Founder talk.  George Washington is not signing his letters that way but Adams commits that sort of stuff to paper. What that means is not only is he blunt, direct, and intelligent but he also even gets to be humorous as well. So in Adams we have this sort of cantankerous, sometimes bemused, more often irritated, occasionally self-aware, sometimes really not, stubborn, book-steeped, event-experiencing, action-taking tour guide. He’s not going to be there all the time. There are going to be long stretches of the course where we don’t find John Adams but he’s definitely going to make repeat appearances, and in the middle of the course he’ll even get to tell a really good story which he actually basically wrote down and said, “Let me tell you this story.” So that’s — As a historian, what’s better than historical characters doing exactly what you want them to do? ‘Here’s a cool story on the Revolution. You can quote it in your lecture courses.’ Oh, and this actually makes me think of another John Adams-related thing before I get to tip number five, which I will get to. Partly I’m curious about this and partly I want to mention something. How many of you saw the HBO mini-series on John Adams? Okay, a goodly number of you. I mention that for a specific reason. Now I will say I of course watched it and the period when it was airing was a really interesting period for me because as an eighteenth-century historian this may be the only time I’ve ever been culturally relevant to popular culture.  I was like: it’s my moment. Right? People are coming up to me and saying, “I’ve got a question about John Adams.” Wow.  This is great. So it was an interesting moment when people actually were thinking about John Adams, and I will say also I watched it with a few historians and we were prepared to throw popcorn at the screen and we ended up pretty much liking it and we were surprised. About halfway through we all looked at each other and said, “It’s actually pretty good.” So I don’t — I mean, of course there are always things that any kind of TV or movie production about history gets wrong, so I won’t say that there’s nothing wrong in it.However, there is one thing that is wrong and I’m going to mention it because if you have pictures in your mind from the mini-series as you sit here in this course it could be a bad thing to think that they are accurate, and what I’m talking about is actually the — I think it’s the first episode. It is of course the first episode, and that’s the episode where the Revolution is beginning and you see people milling about sort of with fists. Right? That represents the Revolution. You see the beginning of the Revolution. The bizarre thing about the way that they depict it is apparently according to the producers of this mini-series, if there was something happening in the early stages of the Revolution, John Adams apparently was there. Boy, they’re shooting at Lexington and Concord. Adams races across the countryside  to get to Lexington and Concord. Boston Massacre — John Adams staring at the —  Well, the idea is really that John Adams somehow is never off his horse, riding around Massachusetts trying to be an eyewitness to every  historical event. Now I understand that probably the people who made this thought: how the heck are we going to communicate Boston Massacre, Lexington and Concord? This is a film about Adams and we can’t say, “Put Adams over here while we now turn to random people on a field shooting.”  So I understand narrative-wise why they needed to do this, but Adams was not at every historical event  in the Revolutionary War. He was at many and he definitely had an insider’s view of the Boston Massacre, but he was not everywhere in Massachusetts.Okay. That oddly enough brings me to tip number five in the Freeman Guide, and tip number five is: remember contingency. Again, an obvious thing but something we don’t think about. People at the time didn’t know what was going to happen, so Adams could not race to places where he didn’t know the things that happened yet: “Something might be happening at Lexington.” People didn’t know what was going to happen.Think for a moment about all of the things that we assume about the Revolution. We assume that the colonists were right and that the British were wrong. We assume that a Revolution was inevitable. We assume that there was broad agreement at any one time about what should be done. Right? Of course we need to declare independence. Of course the colonists are going to win the war. Of course there should be a national union. Those are all the sorts of things that I think we do assume and that’s a lot of assumptions; that’s a lot of “of courses,” but in fact it’s important to remember that people didn’t know what was going to happen.You really need to allow for contingency because literally what they assumed was: anything can happen. Anything can happen. Again one of the things that I love about this time period is that the emotions are so heightened. If you’re in an atmosphere where everything’s up in the air and you’re in the middle of a revolution or you’re trying to create a government and you literally don’t know what’s coming next and anything can happen, ‘maybe I’ll get hanged by the king, maybe I’ll get shot going home, maybe America will hate the Constitution so much they will throw rocks at my head.’ I mean, I don’t know what they were thinking — ‘maybe the Constitution will last four days and then collapse.’ Whatever they’re thinking, the fact is because they literally think anything can happen, anything could fall apart at any second, the emotions are really raised and it’s why a lot of the rhetoric in this period is so extreme. It’s not that these guys are trying to be dramatic. They actually are dramatic; they’re feeling that this is a dramatic kind of a moment, and I don’t think you get that sense, I don’t think you get that idea unless you remind yourself about contingency, about the fact that there are no predetermined outcomes and that anything can happen. I think particularly when you’re studying a revolution it’s really important to remember contingency, and we will discover what contingency means in this time period over the course of the semester. And I will end there. I will see many of you perhaps on Thursday. I will probably know next week better about the reality of when we’ll be meeting for discussion sections.Professor David Blight: Okay, there’s an outline up here. I’m going to try to write a little bigger from now on, and it’s been already suggested I use capital letters and maybe practice my printing a little better. I will do that too. I’m not very high-tech. I will occasionally use some visuals, slides here and there, a painting here and there, an image now and then, and certainly maps, especially in dealing with the 1850s and the coming of the Civil War. But every lecture will have an outline in front of you, and the intention in every case is to get to the fifth part of that outline. I almost always do. Almost. But at least you’ll have a sense of the structure of the topics or the themes that this lecture is supposed to work its way through.I do welcome your questions. I’ll ask at times if you have any questions. This is obviously a terribly formal situation, me up here on this stage and you out there, looking into your laptops in some cases, doing whatever you’re doing on your laptops. Just don’t do what one student did a year ago, though. He was right back there in that aisle-way, halfway back. He came in — it was the day I was lecturing on the Dred Scott decision, for some reason I’ve never forgotten that — and he whipped out the Yale Daily News, and he just was enjoying the Yale Daily News. I didn’t know there was that much to read in it for that long, most of the time. But he’s just reading the Yale Daily News in front of him. And at one point I stopped, rather loudly, and I said, “The Dred Scott decision is not covered in today’s Yale Daily News.” And he didn’t hear me. So I shouted it again, and by that time the whole class was beginning to laugh, uncomfortably, and he finally realized what was going on. The poor guy crumpled up his newspaper and walked out the back and he never came back. I felt a little badly about it but — Just don’t make it so obvious.All right, does everybody have a syllabus, anyone lacking a syllabus, everyone’s got a copy? We may need some more, the balcony people need syllabi. They’re hiding up there. David, do you have any extras? Professor David Blight: None left. Okay, we’ll have more on Thursday. And I should put it on the Web. Dumb. I will put it up, this afternoon we’ll get it up on the Web, through the Registrar’s site or however.Today I’m going to take up the topic primarily of why the American Civil War period has had, still has, such a hold on the American, and for that matter international, historical imagination. That’s what I want to talk about primarily.But I want to say a word or two about the structure of the course and what you need to do, as quickly as possible. First of all every lecture, if you look at the syllabus, has a topic, a title of a kind. I will not get behind, in spite of what it may feel like. The readings are listed each week. We are using, among other things — there’s a combination of readings, in fact, a rich combination of historical monograph, historical kind of syntheses, two works of fiction. Two novels, one by Louisa May Alcott, a famous short, classic little book called Hospital Sketches, which was based on Alcott’s personal experience as a nurse in Civil War hospitals, an experience that all but overwhelmed her, emotionally, psychologically, and she in some ways could not stop thinking about it. We also are reading — using two readers; that is, collections of documents. One is a collection of documents by, mostly by and somewhat about, Abraham Lincoln, a reader edited by Michael Johnson. There’s Nicole Ivy, entering as we speak, the eighth teaching assistant. Sorry Nicole, we just did intros. Anyway, one of the readers is Lincoln, the great speeches, the great public letters. We won’t use every document in the book but the great Lincoln stuff is all there and well introduced.The other reader, which we’ll use virtually every week in the course, and teaching assistants will be free with this to assign whichever documents they so choose, any given week. I’m still taking the plastic off this one. It’s edited by Bill Gienapp, a great Civil War historian, recently deceased. It’s a collection of documents from essentially the Mexican War right on through Reconstruction, many of them very brief and short documents, allowing us at times to teach with a document. It’s possible you’ll have an entire discussion section that centers around a single document, as well as the other reading you did as background.The other novel I neglected to mention is a very new novel. And I’m taking a risk in this course. For years and years, and I won’t admit how many, I’ve always taught Michael Shaara’s great Civil War novel, The Killer Angels, which I would venture a quarter of you have probably already read. All right, how many of you have already read Killer Angels? Ah-ha. We’re not reading it this time. You can’t take that week off. We’re reading E.L. Doctorow’s new novel called The March, which has only been out about a year, just into paperback. It’s Doctorow, the great modern novelist of, well, urban America, of race in America, of so many things. He has actually a brilliant short story in the current New Yorker, if you haven’t read it. It may not appeal to all of you. It’s really about middle-age men in the suburbs. I got it.Any rate, Doctorow’s March is about Sherman’s march to the sea. It’s about Sherman but it’s also about all the people around him. And I think Doctorow accomplished something extraordinary in that novel, which so few American writers of fiction have ever quite been able to imagine — he’s not alone but not many have — and that is fully realize slave characters. Those he invents. A lot of real people in that book, and much of it — like so many other of Doctorow’s great works, like Ragtime, if you’ve read Ragtime, or others — much of the language, the dialog, is verbatim out of historical sources. You might even want to read Sherman’s memoirs in tandem with it, if you have the time. Whole portions of it come directly out of Sherman’s memoirs, and then there are characters invented around it. Anyway, it’s that last, horrible, devastating, destructive, evil, but sometimes good, year and a half of the Civil War in Georgia and South Carolina when the Civil War became a truly kind of total modern affair. It’s a novel about this beast of war itself but it’s very much a novel about what this war was about.Anyway. I don’t want to go into all the readings. I divide this course in three parts which may or may not be obvious the first time you glance at the syllabus. But essentially the first third of the course is the coming of the Civil War, it’s the story from roughly the mid-1840s through Fort Sumter. And the second third of the course is essentially the war itself, where we tackle not only how the Civil War was fought, but we tackle what it was about, and we tackle the question of Confederate defeat and Union victory. How do we explain that? And we especially tackle questions of meaning. If a war of such devastation can have meaning in the end, what are those meanings? It’s, I think, arguably the most important take-home set of questions and answers you might take out of this course. And of course that means we dwell a good deal on emancipation, the single most revolutionary result of the Civil War, and arguably the single most revolutionary historical moment in American history.The liberation of 4.2 million slaves to some kind of freedom and some kind of citizenship, at least for awhile. And the third third of the course is, of course, Reconstruction. That “brief shining moment” as Du Bois once called it, of about eleven years from the end of the Civil — from Appomattox to the disputed election of 1876 and ‘77. Twelve years. One of the most vexing, topsy-turvy, turbulent, embittered periods of American history that historians still fight over, to say the least. It is there where we’ll try to understand the consequences of the Civil War. This is a course at the end of the day about the causes and consequences, as well as the course, of this event.Now — but today is January 15th, it is Martin Luther King’s birthday. Now I’ll start with a very famous passage. It’s not usually the passage you hear from the “I Have A Dream” speech. Almost always when the Dream speech is quoted — and now it’s quoted in commercials, right? Numerous times, or on radio spots, background. King’s voice, as though it’s some kind of American chorus for whatever- when, at any moment we need to feel better about ourselves and about race relations. We often just skip right over the first two or three paragraphs of the speech where the central metaphor he sets up in the speech is what he called “the promissory note,” in the “bank of justice.”“I am happy to join with you today in what will go down in history as the greatest demonstration for freedom in the history of our nation. And so we have come here.” Excuse me. “Five score years ago” — and here he is drawing directly off Lincoln — “five score years ago a great American in whose symbolic shadow we stand today signed the Emancipation Proclamation.” This was of course August 1963. A hot, a brutally hot August day, King on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial. “This momentous decree came as a great beacon, light of hope to millions of Negro slaves who had been seared in the flames of withering injustice. It came as a joyous daybreak,” he says, “to end the long night of their captivity.” That sentence is almost directly from the Bible. “But one hundred years later the Negro still is not free. One hundred years later the life of the Negro is still sadly crippled by the manacles of segregation and the chains of discrimination. One hundred years later the Negro lives on a lonely island of poverty, in the midst of a vast ocean of material prosperity. One hundred years later the Negro is still languished in the corners of American society and finds himself an exile in his own land. And so we’ve come here today to dramatize a shameful condition. In a sense we’ve come here, we’ve come to our nation’s capital, to cash a check. When the architects of our Republic wrote the magnificent words of the Constitution and the Declaration of Independence, they were signing a promissory note to which every American was to fall heir. This note was a promise that all men, yes, black men as well as white men, would be guaranteed the unalienable rights of life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness. It is obvious today that America has defaulted on this promissory note insofar as her citizens of color are concerned. Instead of honoring this sacred obligation America has given the Negro people a bad check, a check which has come back marked ‘insufficient funds.’ But we refuse to believe that the bank of justice is bankrupt, we refuse to believe that there are insufficient funds in the great vaults of opportunity of this nation. And so we’ve come to cash this check, a check that will give us, upon demand, the riches of freedom and the security of justice.” I would be thrilled if you walked out of this course and were able to explain to somebody why King made the promissory note the central metaphor of his “I Have a Dream” speech, and you could somehow explain why it hadn’t been cashed by 1963, and could then begin to discuss whether it’s fully cashed yet. Now — that was just my homage to King.Now, I like to do a little ritual at the beginning of every class. If you’ll forgive me, it only takes me about ten seconds. But you know we live in a world where all of us in this room take books for granted. We throw books on the floor, we throw books at people, we load them in and out of our backpacks, we drop them here and drop them there, we lose them, we rip them up, we write all over them — I write all over mine. It’s only a few generations ago when there really weren’t any bookstores to go to. Your great-great-grandparents couldn’t meander a bookstore, to speak of, unless they lived in a special section of a special city. Books are precious things. A lot of them are assigned in this course. There’s short ones, little ones, big ones, syntheses, novels, monographs. Think of a book, just for a moment, and then you can forget this if you want. But think of a book, any book. It’s hard to think of a really bad book this way, but think of a good book, one of your favorite books ever, as like a newborn child, a newborn child brought into the world. A book. Probably a lot more planning and thought and design and construction, at least intellectually, goes into that book than goes into most babies. Books have a cover. They have beginnings, middles and ends. They’re somebody’s dream, they’re somebody’s creation. They never satisfy — just like people — but they’re in some ways the greatest things we have, and sometimes it’s nice to remind ourselves of that, in the places where we take them most for granted.And I want to quote for you, to you, from the oldest history book in Western civilization. Not just because it’s a book, but I think this is a point one can make about any history course, it doesn’t matter what the subject is. It can be Social History, Political History, Intellectual History, any history. It can be the History of Ancient Rome, it could be Post-1945 United States, it could be any history. But any history course ought to do the two things that Herodotus named in the opening sentence of the oldest history book we have. This is Herodotus, The History. Isn’t it great when you’re writing the first book, what are you going to call it? The History; no subtitles, nothing fancy, just — “I, Herodotus of Halicarnassus, am here setting forth my history, that time may not draw the color from what man has brought into being, nor those great and wonderful deeds manifested by both the Greeks and the barbarians, fail of their report, and together, with all of this, the reason why they fought one another.”I don’t know how closely you listened to that, but what has Herodotus just said? He’s basically said history is two things. It’s the story, it’s the color, it’s the great deeds, it’s the narrative that takes you somewhere; but it’s also the reason why, it’s also the explanations. That’s what history does. It’s supposed to do both of those things. Some of us are more into the analysis, and we’re not so fond of story. Some of us just love stories and don’t care about the analysis — “oh, stop giving me all that interpretation, just tell me the good story again.” This is what goes on, of course, out in public history all the time: “just tell us the old stories and just sing us the old songs, make us feel good again. Stop interpreting, you historians, and worst of all, stop revising.” You notice how that word ‘revision’ has crept into our political culture? When politicians don’t like the arguments of people who disagree with them they accuse them of being revisionist historians. It was even a poll-tested word for a while when Condoleezza Rice was using it. “Revisionist, revisionist.” As though all history isn’t revisionist.My favorite story about revisionism is my buddy, Eric Foner, was on a talk show once. About 1992. He was on one of those shouting talk shows with Lynne Cheney, who at that — Dick Cheney’s wife — who was then head of the NEH. And this was a time — you won’t remember this — we were having this national brouhaha over what were called National History Standards. And Lynne Cheney, if you remember, a real critic of these National History Standards. She didn’t particularly like some of the ideas that the historians were coming up with. So on this talk show — it was Firing Linewhere you get two people on and they just shout at each other for an hour, or a half hour, and the producers love it. And Foner is pretty good at rapid fire coming back, he’s pretty good at it. Anyway they had this set-to and she kept accusing him and other historians of being “revisionist.” And Eric says the next morning he got a phone call from a reporter atNewsweek and she said, “Professor Foner, when did all this revisionism begin?” And Foner said, “Probably with Herodotus.” And the Newsweek reporter said, “Do you have his phone number?” Never underestimate the ignorance — H.L. Mencken said this, I didn’t — never underestimate the ignorance of the American people. Or of journalists, or of — .Now, as to this question of why the Civil War has a hold on us, or a hold on historical imagination in this country. There are many, many ways to think about that. I’m going to take you through seven or eight possible answers to that in just a moment, almost like a list. But again, sometimes if you go back to the oldest explanations you find things that we haven’t even thought about. In Thucydides’ The Peloponnesian War, the first great modern text, in Western Civilization at any rate, about a Civil War, the great Greek Civil War. In Thucydides’ great work he has this little sentence where he actually captures a good deal about why civil wars are such vexing, difficult problems in nations’ memories once they’ve had them. So Thucydides said, “The people made their recollections fit in with their sufferings.” They began to tell a story that reflected their own suffering. Now the ‘they’ here might be white southerners. They suffered. They lost. They were truly defeated, conquered. That suffering might be African-Americans. Emancipation wasn’t a day of jubilee; it was an agonizing, horrible, terrible, sometimes wonderful, set of experiences into the unknown. And the suffering might be northern Unionists. About 300,000 Yankee soldiers died in the Civil War and about 650 to 700,000 were wounded. People made their memories fit their sufferings.I also like this little passage, to just put into your craw, about any History course, about any interpretation. And of course I’m going to have a point of view at times in this course; all historians do. Don’t even listen to a historian if he or she doesn’t have a point of view. None of us are blank slates. None of us can just tell it like it was — “stop interpreting, please.” But I always try to remember William James’ passage in one of his Pragmatism essays, an essay I think that should be required for U.S. citizenship. If I ruled the world you’d have to read this for U.S. citizenship. In it, James says, “The greatest enemy of any one of my truths is the rest of my truths.” It’s as though James is saying, “damn, every time I think I really know something — that’s the truth — along comes some other possible truth and it screws it up.” Why can’t history just be settled? Enough already. If it was, it wouldn’t be any fun; if it was it wouldn’t be interesting; if it was it wouldn’t be good for business either.Now, why does the Civil War have a hold? Why are you here? There’s 280 of you here for a course on the Civil War. I know it fits — 10:30 on Tuesday, Thursday — a hundred other reasons — you want a lecture course. Lots of possible answers to all that kind of question. But why does this event hold people? There are now approximately 65,000 books that have been written on the American Civil War — this doesn’t even really include the books on Reconstruction — that have been written since Appomattox.Now, I realized recently when I was giving a public talk that you can’t always say “since Appomattox” and people know what you mean. I’m going to assume Yale students do. But that’s actually where the surrender was signed that ended the Civil. I was giving a talk recently and I said, “Before Appomattox and after Appomattox” — and I must have said that four of five times. One of the first questions in Q &amp; A is this woman innocently asked, “Well what is Appomattox?” Oh dear. “Well you see ma’am…” Anyway. Since Appomattox 65 — you know what that is? That’s more than one per day — have been published in this country on this event. Why?What does Robert Penn Warren mean when he said, “The Civil War draws us as an oracle, darkly unriddled and portentous of our personal and our national fate”? That’s pretty grandiose language, but what did Warren mean? What did Gertrude Stein mean when she said, “There never will be anything more interesting than that American Civil War”? Of all people, Gertrude Stein was hopelessly interested in this event. “There never will be anything more interesting than that American Civil War,” she said. Why are so many people into this? Why do people want to read about it, re-enact it, go play it, go visit it? Is it just heritage tourism? Is it just the attraction of military history? What is it that compels us to remember the most divisive, the most bloody, the most tragic event in our national history? And how do we remember it? Have we sometimes cleaned it up with such pleasing mythology that we’ve just made it fun?Why is the Confederate flag a problem? Why doesn’t it just go away? It’s the second most ubiquitous American symbol across the world, especially since Michael Jordan quit playing. Other than the U.S. flag, the Confederate flag is the most ubiquitous symbol of the United — maybe Coca Cola, okay, but Coca Cola’s an international symbol now. You can find the Confederate flag everywhere in this world. I spent a year in Germany and I’ve traveled a lot in Eastern Europe. I saw it all over the place. I was in Prague, the Czech Republic, in 1993. Jim McPherson’s Battle Cry of Freedom, a book you’re assigned largely as background, the largest selling book on the American Civil War published in the last twenty-five years. International bestseller, sixteen weeks on the New York Times Bestseller List, was translated into Czech. I mean, nobody reads Czech. Except the Czechs, and even them, even they tend to read fiction in German. Anyway, I was at a bookstore, they had a big display of Jim McPherson’s Battle Cry of Freedom, the whole bookstore window. I couldn’t believe it. But how did they display it? With Confederate flags. And they missed the point of the title of the book, but never mind. How do you portray the American symbol less symbolically? Oh it’s that Confederate flag that will tell us right away what this is about. Why? Why doesn’t the Confederate flag just go away?Or put another way, why do you love the Civil War? I can’t tell you how many thousands of times in public lectures, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera in my — and all Civil War historians face this — people will come up afterward. Usually they want to show you their grandfather’s letters, but they’ll say, “I just love the Civil War.” And you want to just stop them for a moment and say, “You need a shrink.” Or, “What is it you love? Is it the aftermath at Antietam? Is it the trenches of Spotsylvania? Is it the latrines at Andersonville? Is it Booth killing Lincoln? What is it you love?”Is it because we love epics? Is it because a lot of people really are kind of hardwired maybe? We may even be hardwired — biologically — for story. I can’t prove that but there’s a lot of research on this. Are we hardwired for story, and therefore, to some degree, for epic stories that have heroes and villains and beginnings and ends and great collisions? Maybe.Is it because Americans love redemption? And people around the world love to think that about us sometimes too. Is it because we like to see or we’ve converted this terribly divisive experience into a great unifier? Do we go back and look at the Civil War not only to see the beginnings of our own modern time, in a modern American nation, a second American Republic, born out of the death of the first and so on and so forth? But do we actually go back to this most dividing experience to figure out how we became unified? Or as William Dean Howells put it in 1900 in a lovely line, he said, “What the American people always like is a tragedy as long as they can give it a happy ending.”Is it because we see the American Civil War, or have learned to see it, as American’s first great racial reckoning? Where the nation’s national sin of slavery, as some like to put it, had to finally be remitted in some way, purged, cleansed? In the language used by both sides in this war, of purgings and cleansings. The war that brought a reckoning from 250 years of slavery, destroyed a slave society, brought the end of the First American Republic, and the revolution of emancipation. I think there’s a lot to argue that Americans have begun, at least, they’ve just begun this, to love the Civil War because they love emancipation. They want to live in the nation that freed its slaves.My favorite line in George Bush the first’s Inaugural Address in 1989 — and I’m probably the only one that ever bothers to remember this line or maybe the only one who cares. But Peggy Noonan wrote him a sentence. It’s classic inaugural rhetoric and it comes right after the section in Bush One’s inaugural where he’s saying we must put the war in Vietnam behind us, it is too divisive and so on. And then there’s a line where he says, “We must remember, we are the nation that sent 600,000 of its sons to die rather than have slavery.” Now, who wouldn’t want to live in that country? That’s a great line in an inaugural address. Of course it’s ignoring the fact that at least half of those people died to preserve slavery. But never mind, I mean — Do we love the Civil War because sometimes there’s a lot of guilty pleasure, or not so guilty pleasure, in just loving the details of military history? And if you’re one of those, fine, that’s great. I had that stage, too. I will confess, if you make me. But what is all that nostalgia about for those battlefields?Or is it because this experience in American history is ultimately about loss? Are we attracted to loss? Is loss more interesting sometimes than victory? And by loss I mean defeat but also loss in terms of human life, treasure, proportions of civilizations that died. Take loss for just a moment. If you took the 620,000-odd Americans who died in the Civil War, you moved it ahead to the Vietnam era in roughly the twelve years the United States fought in Vietnam, per capita — okay? — approximately four million Americans would’ve died in Vietnam. That’s the scale of death and loss in the Civil War — four million. Now Americans will never sustain four million casualties in a war, I would argue. I can’t prove that. Unless Osama bin Laden is coming through that window. Who knows, maybe he will one day. Wouldn’t that be cool? You wouldn’t sleep through that lecture. But I don’t think Americans will ever sustain that kind — but four million — if you came, per capita from the Civil War-era population to the era of Vietnam.Every year at Antietam, in rural Maryland, on the anniversary of the battle, 17th of September, they put out illuminati, or the illuminaria, excuse me — no, no, whoa, that’s a slip — illuminaria, or the little candle lamps, all over the battlefield. They put 23,000 of them out, which was the number of casualties in eight hours at Antietam. And when the sun goes down you can look at the battlefield and get a sense of this kind of powerful, almost artistic sense of the loss. Every one of those little candle lights was a human life.Related to that, is the American imagination for this event still stimulated in part because sometimes we just like lost causes? We are attracted to defeat sometimes more than we are attracted to victory. Loss in war is sometimes more interesting. Lost causes somehow represent the rebel spirit, a rebellious spirit, an insurrectionary spirit, an insurgent spirit. Some people may be attracted in that way.And maybe last but not least, and this list could go on and on, there is I think an interest in the Civil War, among serious readers in particular because it does somehow satisfy that search we often all have for origins. The origins of the modern nation state, the origins of big government, the origins of centralized power, the origins of what seemed to be the death of state’s rights; but it surely didn’t die, did it? We have a state’s rights Supreme Court now, in case you didn’t notice. The birth of a kind of modernity in America, in many forms, comes out of this era. It doesn’t just come out of the Battle of Gettysburg but it surely comes out of the era.There’s also this sense in which, somehow, in that experience of the Civil War in the middle of the nineteen century — fought for the existence of an American nation and for the new definition of that nation, and just how free and equal the people in it would be — is where we may somehow see that transformation from a pre-modern to a more modern world. And sometimes I suspect that’s what attracts us.Now, the watch says I only have about two minutes. So let me leave you here. I do think sometimes we’re attracted because war is just so beguilingly fascinating. And Drew Faust, a wonderful historian whom you now know is the President of Harvard University, has just published a brand new book, it’s literally just out this week. I read it in manuscript, I have a blurb on the back. It’s called The Republic of Suffering. And she has much to say in that book, which I highly recommend, about why death is so interesting.Let me leave you with this. Thursday, I’m going to take up the Old South and begin this comparison of the Old South to the growing capitalist — well, both sides were highly capitalist — northern society. But in 1850 or 1840s America you could find both extremes of, on the one hand, a tremendous seemingly unfathomable optimism about America. It seemed to be limitless and boundless, and nobody captured it, ever, any better than Walt Whitman. But you can also find expressions all over the culture, especially from African-Americans and abolitionists and some slaveholders of a great dread about the direction of the country. In Whitman’s first line of his Drum-Taps, his famous collection of Civil War poetry, comes that phrase, which is up here: “First O Songs for a Prelude.” And that first poem in Drum-Taps is Whitman trying to capture just how exciting war can be.But he’d also written a poem like “Democracy.” And I’ll leave you with this, and I’ll start with a response to it on Thursday. In Whitman’s “Democracy,” as well as several other Whitman poems, you can find this limitless sense of optimism. Just listen to his words: “Sail, sail thy best ship of Democracy. Of value is thy freight, ‘tis not the Present only, the Past is also stored in thee.” This America, this thing called America to him is the whole world’s new beginning. “Thou holdest not the venture of thyself alone, not the Western continent alone. Earth’s résumé entire floats on thy keel! O ship is steadied by thy spars. With thee Time voyages in trust. The antecedent nations sink or swim with thee.” America is everything, according to Whitman. “With all their ancient struggles, martyrs, heroes, epics, wars though bearest the other continents. Theirs, theirs as much as thine, the destination-port triumphant. Steer then with good strong hand and wary eye. O helmsmen, though carriest great companions. How can I pierce the impenetrable blank of your future? I feel thy ominous greatness, evil as well as good. I watch thee advancing, absorbing the present, transcending the past. I see thy light lighting and thy shadow shadowing as if the entire globe. But I do not undertake to define thee, hardly can I comprehend thee.” Well that’s Whitman saying, as we all do at times, “America is an idea.” This course is the story of what that idea was and what happened to it, and the chance it had coming out of it. Chapter 1: Welcome Professor Paul Freedman: So welcome to History 210, The Early Middle Ages. I’m Paul Freedman. And behind this innocuous title “The Early Middle Ages”–I think we’re going to have to jazz it up a little. I think we’re going to put an exclamation mark on it, at least. But behind this innocuous title, you will see, I hope, if you stay for this course, a strange course. Strange, not because it covers the particular period 250 to 1000, but because it starts out very recognizable, and gets stranger and stranger, and seems to dissolve into a kind of a hard to grasp world. Hard to grasp, but fun. I will talk about both the strangeness and the fun aspects in more detail.There are several great themes in this span of centuries: the fall of the Roman Empire; its survival in the East, as the Byzantine Empire; the so-called barbarian invasions and kingdoms, set up on the ruins of the Roman Empire; the triumph of Christianity, which went from being an outlawed minority religion to the established faith of the Roman Empire; and then survived the extinction of the Roman Empire.We have two Teaching Fellows: Lauren Mancia, sitting at this end, and Agnieszka Rec, standing in that corner. So far, there are sections scheduled for Wednesday at 4 o’clock and Friday at 10:30. We’ll probably have two other sections. We’ll see how large the class is next week. Let me know if those two section times–well, probably, the sections to be added would be on Thursday: Thursday afternoon and Thursday evening. Let me know if you have some special problem in terms of the scheduling of the sections.As I said, when some of you were already here, I’ll have some pauses, so that if you are shopping and want to look at another course, it’ll be, if not easy, at least possible for you to get up and leave. So I’ll have several pauses during the presentation.But, I should say, I do want to give a full class discussion today, or presentation today. We only have so many opportunities to discuss things. And I’d like to set the scene for you. And I think that will also help you decide about taking this course.Now, this course is part of the Yale Open Courses Program. And, as you probably know, there are lots of–well, a select number, but a substantial number of courses that are offered free to the public via the Internet. And this is one of them for the fall. And I take this opportunity to greet our Internet students and Internet friends.So since it’s part of this project, a Yale University broadcast team will be recording all the classes. And they’ll be as unobtrusive as possible. The classroom experience will be essentially as it would be if they’re not there. And it’s their intention to videotape me, and not you, so neither your faces nor voices are supposed to appear. Your questions are unlikely to be heard. I will repeat the questions, so that people watching this on the Internet will have an idea.And I do encourage questions, both things that you haven’t understood or things for elucidation. I have a slightly more formal lecture style than some people, perhaps. I try to have a reasonably structured lecture that doesn’t wander off too much. Some of you have taken courses from me and know I have certain themes, or preoccupations, or diversions. But I’m going to try to be as coherent as possible, partly because we are filming.So I hope that you’re enthusiastic about the fact that we are participating in this Yale Open Courses initiative. And, having said that, now you should just think it away. The broadcast team is not very conspicuous. And the objective is for us to interact in the classroom as we normally would. And this is part of the unique experience of teaching and learning at Yale, so don’t hesitate to ask me if you have any questions or concerns.The syllabus, you all have copies of the syllabus, I believe. And, of course, you’ll have seen it on the server. The books are at Yale Bookstore, and they are all there. I hope there will be enough copies; if not, we will get more. The first assignment is, conveniently in this sense, from the course pack. The course pack is at TYCO, the photocopy place on Elm Street. If you don’t know where that is, let us know.And the assignments for Monday and Wednesday, those first two assignments are from Peter Brown’s The World of Late Antiquity and A. H. M. Jones’ Constantine and the Conversion of Western Europe.Questions so far? Right. OK. So the requirements that you see on the syllabus are a short paper that’s due October the 10th. A mid-term that will be held in class October 17th. And a long paper, which is due December 5th. That long paper is a research paper. And we’ll be glad to help you choose a topic, offer you suggestions, help you get started on that. It’s 15 to 20 pages, and it counts for 40% of your grade. The mid-term counts 30% of the grade; the short paper 20%; and your section grade is 10%.Now, this course does not have onerous requirements. But I expect you to do the requirements that we have. There’s no final exam. I urge you to blot out of your mind the temptation not to do the reading because there’s no final exam, or the reading of the second part of the course. And if we think that this is a problem, judging on the basis of how the sections go, we reserve the possibility of giving you quizzes in the section in the section  half of the course.Paper times, I’m going to be firm on this. I can’t say absolutely no extensions on the paper, because I acknowledge the existence of overwhelming emergencies. But let me give you an example of an excuse that’s not going to be accepted: “I have three other papers due that week.” OK? Plan in advance. We are at your disposal. If you want to plan your final paper tomorrow, hey, this afternoon, talk to me. I’m eager to hear from you about that.In the sections, we don’t want you to bring laptops. And the reason for that is, not that we think you’re going to be Facebooking or answering your email, because we know that you never do that. The laptops, in our experience, interfere with the purpose of the section, which is partly to talk to each other. And rather than focusing on the screen, and then, in a sense, being a series of archipelago of little islands, rather than a section, in the sense of give and take and interchange. If you think that that imposes some kind of hardship on you, I think you’ll find that it is pleasant. And if there’s some technical hardship, let me know.So logistical questions? Questions about the organization in the course, or any other aspect of this? Good, that means that I’m clearer than on some occasions. So, if anybody wants to leave now, this is one opportunity. But, since it looks like I have your attention riveted, let me introduce the course in terms of its actual content.Chapter 2: Introduction to the Themes of the Course We are beginning by looking at the crisis of the Roman Empire. And then we will be looking at its peculiar legacy. In the year 1000, where we stop, we will still be dealing with The Inheritance of the Roman Empire, the title of Chris Wickham’s book, one of the books that we’re going to be using a lot.The legacy is peculiar because, while the memory of the Roman Empire remains intact throughout the period, and beyond–I mean, to this day, the head of the Catholic Church is in Rome. Until 1960, the transactions of the papacy were in Latin; the services of the Church were in Latin, the Catholic Church were in Latin. And Latin remains the official language of the Catholic church in its administrative head.So the most faithful preserver of Rome and its legacy, historically, is the Catholic Church. And this is a paradox because the Church begins its career, and, indeed, its first 250 years, as illegal in the Roman empire. And, indeed, there are periodic persecutions where people were punished, including killed, because they were Christian.The most faithful preserver of Rome, however, after the fifth century collapse of the Empire in the West, is the so-called Byzantine Empire–the Byzantine Empire with its headquarters in Constantinople. Despite the fact that it would abandon Latin for Greek in the sixth century and turn into a very different kind of political and cultural entity, the Byzantine Empire went down in flames to the Turks in 1453 still as the Roman Empire. That was its official name to the end.Another heir to the Roman Empire, in a sense, is Islam, which begins in the seventh century, in the middle of our period. I don’t have to emphasize to you the historical importance of Islam. But our task is to understand its origin and its astonishing expansion in terms of this era, 250 to 1000. To understand it in terms of its times, and thus how it arises and interacts with the Roman and Byzantine as well as, offstage, the Persian, Empires that it either destroys or weakens in the seventh and eighth centuries.Mohammed was from outside the former empire, from Arabia, and may be said to represent a very different kind of set of ideas. But the power of Islam would, for centuries, be concentrated in areas of the former Roman Empire: the Mediterranean, the Balkans, Egypt, Syria, North Africa. Of course, in the latter, it still is the overwhelming majority religion.And Islam then brings up a sort of question that I’m not going to deal with directly very much, but that will be at the back of our minds, and that is relevance. This is a pre-industrial course; it’s in the very pre-industrial category in terms of requirements. It’s far away; it’s distant. That is part of its appeal, I think, is as I said, its strangeness.But the lessons from the material covered in this course are perhaps these– worth thinking about. How, perhaps the most successful, multi-cultural empire of Western history, how it did that, how it endured for so long. The success of the Roman Empire and why it finally failed. And in that failure, how does a rich, literate, well-developed society come to be destroyed by a more primitive one? Primitive, at least, in the sense of material culture, economic complexity, urbanization, and literacy.Another important lesson is the power of religious ideas, not only intrinsically as part of people’s lives and outlook, but socially and historically: how religion affects the political course of history.Having said this, I think I did mention, I was going to tell you what was fun about this course. This is what I think is fun, and I’ve already kind of alluded to this. We begin with a familiar world, in the sense that the Roman Empire, although obviously not technologically the same as the one we live in, is a very advanced society and a very complex one. Advanced? Well, go to Europe and look around, and see the engineering feats of the Romans. See the public life that the baths, stadia, temples, law courts, marketplaces, whose ruins still, in many instances, dwarf the towns that survived around them. See what an accomplishment that is.It is a huge empire, a bureaucratic empire, one with lots of literate people, a huge army, a huge civil service, a lot of commerce back and forth, all things that are familiar to us. But as it weakens and collapses, you get a kind of, if not post-apocalyptic, at least transformative experience. It gets stranger and stranger, more and more disorganized, harder to understand at first grasp. Basically we begin in the Shire, and we end up in more dangerous territories. It’s hard to describe the territory that we end up in, but that is what I think is intriguing about the course. You start out in a familiar world, and it just becomes something alien, but, I think, appealing.Appealing, but I do have one warning for you. Or one thing that I have seen students surprised at, and sometimes even annoyed at. And that is, we’ve got to talk about religion: both Christianity and Islam, and, to a more limited extent, Judaism, and also paganism, for that matter. But the one that tends to bother people actually is Christianity. So sometimes people will say, I thought I was taking a History course, and this turned into a Religious Studies course before my eyes. We’re going to have to talk about some heresies. You’re going to have to understand, actually, what people are fighting and killing each other over, when they talk about the nature of Christ, or the relationship among the three persons of the Trinity.This is unfamiliar, but, again, I think unfamiliarity is good for us. And unfamiliarity has a funny way of turning into familiar. When I started teaching–well, dinosaurs weren’t walking the earth, but they’d just departed, primitive birds and early mammals–the assumption was that religion was safely–religion as a political movement, not religion as a personal commitment, but religion as something that had an impact on politics was pretty safely gone, and that it was a feature of medieval history. Obviously the last years have shown us, in many ways, the power of religious ideas. The power of religious ideas, not solely personally, but collectively; not solely as sentiments, but as political movements.Chapter 3: The Roman Empire before the Crisis of the Third Century So we begin with the crisis of the Empire, the first crisis of the Empire in the third century AD. If we go back just before that– this isn’t officially part of the course, this is like the chef offers you this little amuse-bouche, this little snack to begin the meal. The period of the Good Emperors, the second century AD– the term the Good Emperor is a term popularized by the great historian of The Decline and Fall of The Roman Empire, Edward Gibbon, who wrote in the 18th century. And it’s one of those works that, whatever its myriad factual and interpretive inaccuracies, still sets the program for how we look at the decadence and collapse of the Roman Empire.Gibbon says, “If a man were called upon to fix the period in history of the world during which the condition of the human race was most happy and prosperous, he would, without hesitation, name that which elapsed from the accession of Nerva to the death of Marcus Aurelius,” that is, 96 to 180 AD. He goes on, “Their united reigns are possibly the only period in which the happiness of a great people was the sole object of government.” So it’s this period of the so-called Good Emperors against which the subsequent decline traced in Gibbon’s monumental work would take place.Now, as opposed to Gibbon, we’re not so confident that the Roman Empire was so wonderful for everybody involved. We have a somewhat more egalitarian outlook than Gibbon. Gibbon never says, oh, well, what about the slaves? Or what about the peasant, or hey, the position of the women in society? But more than that, I think we have some more doubt and hesitation as to whether any state, particularly any powerful state, necessarily represents a standard of virtue or happiness. For the poor, the smooth functioning of the Roman government was less important than it was for the propertied classes. Because the Roman state, like most states, in so far as it practiced the rule of law, was set up to guarantee property, not rights.And you’ll see Wickham, when we come to read him, he emphasizes, in the chapter on the burden of rule in the Roman Empire– this is for September 19th– the Roman Empire was not organized to reward ordinary people. To different degrees, and at varying times, it did rely on slave labor. This is easy to exaggerate. It’s not a slave society. It’s not an overwhelmingly slave-owning society, but certainly many of its enterprises involved slavery. Its laws were designed to protect the property of the wealthy, rather than to mete out equal justice.Rome was an imperial power, and, as I will say in a moment, it was an extraordinarily tolerant one. But it was tolerant as long as you conformed to their image of civilization. Like many great imperial powers, it assumed that there were certain areas of life that were optional. They were very tolerant with regard to religion, for example. But their definition of civilization was being like us. They were generous about that. They would make citizens of people from the Celtic lands of Britain to Egypt. But this meant conforming to a certain set of standards, beliefs, assumptions, and a way of life.Another thing that we now would dissent from Gibbon about is the efficiency of the Roman Empire. To Gibbon, in the 18th century, the Roman Empire appeared a marvel of efficiency. But really, how could it be efficient? The distances were so long, and travel was so slow. This is an empire that took weeks and weeks to traverse in the state of communications. And we know, from contemporary times that, even with great communications, indeed, with instantaneous communications, it’s very hard to hold states together.And, in fact, one of the things that’s happened in the last 50 years is the weakening of the state, strangely enough. Strangely, because what people thought was going to happen is what had been going on in the 20th century generally. States had become more and more powerful, more and more dictatorial, more and more tyrannical. And, indeed, George Orwell’s 1984, written in the post-war era in the late 1940s, assumes that totalitarianism is what’s going to be generalized. In fact, it turns out that the problem is not so much the state– look at the great states of the mid-20th century: one no longer exists, the Soviet Union, and the other, the United States–whatever our strengths are–it doesn’t seem to be the extraordinary power of the central government, which is, in fact, much reduced from what is was in, say, 1950, by any measurement.So we have a different idea of the state. We’re more aware of the limitations of state power in past times. We’re more aware of the discrepancy between the rhetoric of power– and no polity equals the Roman Empire for its ceremonies of power, its architecture of power, its culture of power. But the emperor, in fact, however glorious, however much in the third century was worshiped as a god, his power was limited. His power was limited in terms of enforcement, if not in theory.And this will be important because, right from the start, we’re going to assess the accomplishments of the Emperor Diocletian, at the end of third century, and the Emperor Constantine, beginning of the fourth century, who may be said to have saved the empire from collapse. The thing about the Roman Empire that is indisputable, and does not have a value judgment attached to it, is that it was enduring. The Roman Empire lasted for an incredibly long time; it was stable.In the year 410 the Visigoths sacked, plundered Rome. They entered the city of Rome, this so-called barbarian tribe, and they pillaged it. They pillaged it in a fairly orderly way, but, nevertheless, they pillaged it. This was the first time this had happened in the city of Rome in something on the order of 800 years. The Empire itself, by this time, was nearly 400 years old.The other indisputable accomplishment of the Roman Empire is that it controlled the Mediterranean. The Mediterranean was its center, referred to often as Mare Nostrum, as “Our Sea.” Our sea because they controlled all of the shoreline of the Mediterranean–the only power that has ever done that. There have been great empires: the Ottoman Empire, the Byzantine Empire, the Caliphate, but none of them controlled more than about 40% of the Mediterranean at any one time.So even if we dissent from Gibbon’s calm assurance that the best period of human history was the era of the Good Emperors in the second century AD, we shouldn’t minimize the accomplishments of this empire and of this era. To live in security, with respect to both outside enemies and internal disorder, essentially peace and the rule of law, was unusual. And, unfortunately, it remains so.Rome was an immense empire. It stretched from England to the Sahara, from Spain to Armenia. It had a common language of administration, Latin. And two cultural languages, Greek and Latin, understood by the elite from one end of the empire to the other. The cities were not walled until the third century.Gibbon, in particular, emphasizes the tolerance of Rome, which appealed to his innate anti-clericalism. And, as many of you know, his explanation for the fall of the Empire was Christianity. It was Christianity that weakened the Empire, weakened its  elite, turns its attention to foolish controversies over Trinitarian or Christological concerns, when they should have been concentrating on the barbarians. This is not accepted anymore, for reasons that will become clearer in these first few weeks.And its appeal though, the idea of toleration, is very important to Gibbon, writing in the 18th century, when Europe had just emerged from centuries of religious wars. Having seen the wars of the Reformation, well not literally, he hadn’t lived through them, but being the inheritor of these religious wars, of the Thirty Years War in Germany in the 17th century, of religious controversy in Britain, Gibbon, like many members of the Enlightenment generation he was part of, thought that the world would be far better if religion remained either an exclusively private matter or just disappeared. So for him, the villain in history, and in particular, the villain in Roman history is religion.But, however tolerant, of course, Rome drew the line at Christianity, for reasons we shall discuss. But it is still, historically, quite unusual that the Empire should have permitted all of these other religions. Indeed, rather than regarding, say, the religions of Egypt as inferior, they simply brought those gods in. Monday, you might worship Zeus. And Tuesday hey, if you wanted to see if Isis was going to help you with your impending business deal, why not go and see an Egyptian temple?So its eclectic. It’s a little bit like the way Americans dine out. It makes no sense to most people, in most of the world, to say something like, “Oh, I don’t want Japanese food. I had that for lunch.” If you’re in Japan you’re expected to have Japanese food for lunch and for dinner, and the same with Italian food. The same is true of religion, most people don’t just say, “Oh, I don’t want to go to Presbyterian Church this weekend, I’m going to go worship at a Buddhist temple, just for a change”. This is more in the nature of Roman religion. So this kind of tolerance is unusual. So tolerance, tolerance is a real virtue of the Empire, even if it’s limited. Real virtue because it’s unusual, historically.Peace – the Roman Empire spent half of its state budget on the army. On the other hand, no empire this large could be held together by military means alone. It was held together by an elite that shared notions of civilization, that made certain sacrifices for the public good. Those games, the circuses, the competitions, the ceremonies were usually paid for by private people, not by the state, for example.It is an urban civilization, with an elite that is urban. The cities held their local gods. They had local administration. They built aqueducts, temples, law courts, all these edifices that I mentioned earlier. It was a cosmopolitan way of life. So it’s diverse in the sense that there are many different peoples, but unified, in the sense that the elite shares a common language and even the city planning is the same. If you went to London or you went to Timgad, in what’s now the Algerian desert, you’d know your way around. You’d know where to find the marketplace. You’d know that it was laid out in a grid. You’d know where the law courts would be in relation to the temples. You could find your way, just as if you get off the interstate, you know that there will be a Wendy’s or a Denny’s or a Shell station. And it would be an exceptional place that didn’t have them. If you couldn’t find a Home Depot, even without benefit of technical aids, getting off an exit of the average interstate highway then you don’t live in America, or you haven’t been here very long. So the same thing, there’s a sort of a mental picture of what a city looks like, from one end of the empire to the other.But it is an empire that is centered around the Mediterranean, and not just logistically or politically, but culturally. For the Romans, their empire included lands where olive trees didn’t grow, and where wine grapes didn’t flourish, but those places were not places they wanted to live. They wanted to control them, but they were beyond civilization. So a government official on the Danube, in what’s now Hungary, writes home complaining that, quote, “The inhabitants lead the most miserable of lives for they cultivate no olives and they drink no wine,” end of story. And you could imagine, there’s a certain kind of East Coast discourse on the order of, “They have blueberry bagels out here, I can’t live here. ” Or, you know, the nearest Starbucks is 30 miles away, and there’s no substitute. This is an impressive empire then.Chapter 4: Flaws of the Roman Empire So, its flaws– it has an imbalance between the urban and the rural, not as great as historians once thought, but it is dominated by cities that depend on peasants, but that tend to drain the land of its vitality. It’s also imbalanced East-West. Strangely enough, for an empire that was founded in the West, by the time we start, the East is more prosperous. It’s more urban. It has more trade. It’s better organized, more commercial. Another flaw of this empire is its size. It works for a long time, and then, when it doesn’t work, this becomes a real problem.And then the army– the army in the third century discovers that it can make and unmake emperors. So the immediate crisis of the third century, which lasts from 235 to the accession of Diocletian in 284, is that it has dozens and dozens of emperors. Most reign for less than three years. All but one die violently. So the two things are linked, the power of the army to proclaim an emperor, and the inability of that emperor to keep this power before the army or an army somewhere, in one province or another, rises up another emperor and kills the former one.So it’s a durable empire, but an unwieldy, and in certain respects, exhausted one.So in the first part of the course, we’re going to look at how this empire functioned. And we’re going to look at its two great crises. The first of them, this third century crisis, which involves all these many different emperors, also has invasions from Persia, also has the first indications of barbarian invasions across the frontier of the Danube and the Rhine rivers, but it survives this first crisis. And that is the accomplishment of Diocletian, about whom you’re going to be reading.The second crisis, that of the fifth century, is similar, in many respects, but more final in its results. The fifth century crisis witnesses the collapse of the Roman Empire in the West, the fall of the Roman Empire of Gibbon, that Gibbon made famous, and that continues to inspire a certain amount of fascination and fear today.So here are some questions that should be in the back of your mind, at least, while you do this reading for the first few weeks. When we’re talking about the collapse or weakening of the Roman empire, did this happen because of foreign threats or internal weakness? The rhetorical topos, and it’s often invoked with regard to empires in the modern world, is internal weakness. That’s because the opponents don’t seem very savage or very impressive. But it’s not necessarily a given. As I said before, external enemies, even that don’t appear to be that imposing, can, under certain circumstances, impress their will on what would seem to be a more powerful empire. To some extent that is, indeed, because of internal weakness. But it won’t do to exaggerate that. But this is one of the problems.Another problem is continuity versus change. The East survives. The East even flourishes for a while. And even for a while seems to be on the verge of re-conquering the West from the barbarians. So how can we talk about the fall of the Roman Empire when, you know, only part of it falls?Another question is, how did the rise of Christianity affect the political and cultural fortunes of the Empire? As I said, Gibbon said it affected its fortunes by destroying it. But beyond that, I think, over simple explanation, how did Christianity change the Empire? Was this change a catastrophe or a transformation? And, how did Christianity triumph? It seems to be so alien to everything Roman. How does it become the official religion of the Empire? And, how does it become, indeed, identified with the Empire?All of these questions are currently very much debated by historians. I’m not going to have a definitive answer for you. I’ve certain opinions. I’ll present the information basically in accord with that, but this is not something that has been scientifically proven or received universal acknowledgement.So we begin this course with the reign of the Emperor Diocletian, 284 to 305. And we do this because he solved a number of problems which threatened the survival of the Empire in the third century. These problems, as I said, instability of rule, Persian invasion, barbarian invasions, and then, one I didn’t mention, which is inflation, tremendous economic dislocation.All of these are manifestations of the long-term flaws I just mentioned. The thing about long-term flaws– I mean, you can point to long-term flaws in the Soviet Empire or long-term flaws in the British Empire. But why do they manifest themselves when they do? Or, to put it another way, why does the empire go on and flourish for a couple hundred years, or a few decades, and then collapse?And I look forward to talking with you on Monday. Thanks. Professor John Merriman: I’m John Merriman and this is History 202. I’m here every Monday and Wednesday, 10:30 a.m. to 11:20 a.m. The way this course is, these are all really major themes. I’m going to go over this a little bit, and I’m going to talk about some of the themes. I kind of lecture on things that I think that complement what you’re doing. Let me give you an example. When I talk about the New Imperialism, why it is that Europe basically took over the entire world between the 1880s and 1914, you can read the chapter in A History of Modern Europe, which I had fun writing, but I lecture on the Boy Scouts. I often say that I lecture on the Boy Scouts because I was thrown out of the Boy Scouts in Portland, Oregon, when I was a kid, because I didn’t manage to accumulate a single badge and was totally useless after sports seasons ended. But that’s not why I do it.To understand the New Imperialism, why Europe took over essentially all of Africa, where they had places that were totally uncharted that suddenly became highly contested between British, French, German, and Italian conquerors, one has to understand the culture of imperialism. The ordinance of the Boy Scouts in Britain has a lot to do with that. Why generations of British youth and their counterparts in Germany, and even Australia, New Zealand, and other places, began to think that it was important to be able to look at a map in their schoolhouse that had the color red for Britain increasingly taking over the map of Asia and Africa, and lots of other places as well. So, instead of — at the very beginning of that lecture, I’ll say, “Look, there are three things you really ought to know about the New Imperialism, why they did this.” Then I talk about the Boy Scouts, so that those two things will fit together.Or, when I talk about World War I, and we’ll have two lectures. My friend and colleague, Jay Winter, is doing one of them on the Great War and modern memory. Instead of trying to do the entire war, and there is, I think, a quite sporty chapter on that in the book, I’ll talk about trench warfare. You’ll see a film called Paths of Glory. That’s an early Kubrick film about the mutinies in 1917. I’ll talk about the mutinies in 1917 when people just said, “Enough is enough. There’s no sense dying for nothing. We won’t go over the top.” Which is to say that it’s important to come to lecture, and it’s important to come to sections.I’ve cut back on the reading. I used to use about four more books than I use now, but it’s better to concentrate on what you’re doing. The books are A History of Modern Europe, second edition, which I wrote for people like you. Then you’ll read Persian Letters, not all of it. That would be a rather lengthy day or so. You’ll read excerpts in Persian Letters, and Montesquieu talks about relations between West and East, and it’s a phenomenal moment in the history of the Enlightenment. Then you have a pause where you’re basically just reading me, for better or for worse, but I hope for better, until you get to Émile Zola, his great novel, Germinal, which is a classic. Zola was the first sort of naturalist novelist, at least in France. When he wrote Germinal, germinal means budding, like the budding of trees. But he means the budding of people being aware of themselves as workers. He went down to the mines in the north of France in the Anzin. One of the heroes of the book is a woman called Catherine, who is fifteen years old, but has seen a lot of life for being fifteen years old.When Zola wrote Germinal, he went down into the mines to look at fifteen-year-old young women, barely older than girls, working in the mines twelve hours a day. It’s a book that resounds with reality. It’s really kind of an amazing book, and I think you’ll like that. I hope you will. Then Helmut Smith’s The Butcher’s Tale is about accusations of ritual murder in a German town. It’s about the second German Reich, and it’s about anti-Semitism in a small place with bigger consequences. George Orwell went off to fight the good fight in Spain during the Spanish Civil War, where it was sort of a dry run for an even more horrible war, and even more horrible fascists. It’s about his engagement and disillusionment in the Spanish republican forces, the loyalist forces, and about the tensions and the duplicity of Stalin’s folks undercutting the Trotskyites and undercutting the anarchists. It’s one of those classics that’s a classic for a very good reason. It’s really a marvelous read.Finally, there’s Ordinary Men. I go to Poland a lot. In the last couple of years I’ve been there four or five times for various reasons, and I’d never been to Auschwitz. I went to Auschwitz a year ago. I don’t know, some of you have probably been there. As you’re going through the horror of it all, and as you’re seeing empty suitcases with people’s names on them that the people don’t exist anymore, and you’re seeing baby shoes and things like that. You think, “Who could have done this? Who could have gone out and simply, in an assembly line way, killed people?” Or in fields around Lodz, which was a large industrial town and still is in Poland, simply gone out and blown the brains out of mothers, babies, grandmothers, and anybody they found. Who could have done it? Well, the answer that Chris Browning has is ordinary men. And he had the quite brilliant idea of looking at a German unit, essentially policemen from Hamburg, the port town of Hamburg, an old important Hanseatic port. And he follows them from the lives of very ordinary people into the killing fields, it was nothing less than that, of Poland. It’s also short. Germinal is long, but these other ones are short. It’s gripping. It’s quite amazing. So, those are the books.I think that A History of Modern Europe — I hope — is fun to read. I think you will enjoy that. The lectures kind of — you see the themes speak for themselves. Sections, everybody likes Wednesday night sections. One of my colleagues has only Wednesday night sections. We’ve gone increasingly to that, because sometimes you don’t find a large audience even on Friday morning 10:30 slots. We’ve abandoned that. So, tentatively, we’re going to have two at 7:00 p.m., two at 8:00 p.m., then Thursday at 1:30 p.m., and Thursday at 2:30 p.m. I don’t know. When are we starting sections? Sometimes we don’t do it until the second week. It depends on what day. What day is this? Wednesday. I don’t know. Maybe we’ll start them next week. Maybe we won’t. Who knows? But they will happen, and there’s also a short, sporty paper assignment. By short I don’t mean two pages, but something like seven pages, eight pages on something that you want to write about.Now, let me give you some examples just off the top of my head. If you have any interesting in painting, for example, it would be interesting to take looks by, say, two Impressionist painters like Pissarro and Renoir, and to see how they viewed the transformation of nineteenth-century Paris, the big boulevards and all of that. Or you could take another novel. Germinal, one of the interesting things about it is that it’s a document of history. It’s a novel, so these are invented people, but it’s a document of history in some ways, as is lots of the great literature of World War I. There isn’t any period in modern history that has so much gripping literature about it as the Great War, the British war poets like Siegfried Sassoon. And a lot of these people were dead after they wrote. Sassoon wasn’t, at least not immediately. I can’t remember if he dies in 1918 or not. But to take some of the poetry, or the writing of the war, and write a paper about it.Or, if you’re into diplomatic history, or something like that — I don’t know, a paper re-evaluating the origins of the Crimean War. That might put you to sleep before it puts your TA to sleep. But you can imagine a good paper on that. You can do whatever you want. When I do the Enlightenment, borrowing from my good friend Bob Darnton, I’ll do a thing at the beginning about why the Enlightenment was important, what it is. There’s secularization, rational inquiry, and all of that, stuff that you may already know, maybe not. But it’s in the book. But then what I do is I look at some of the third string, or the third division in the European football sense, of Enlightenment hacks, and what they wrote about royalty, and about aristocrats, and the way they kind of undermined those traditional hierarchies that would be swept away, to a large extent, by the French Revolution. Or you could take somebody out of the French Revolution, such as the steely Saint-Just, who ran off with his mother’s silver at age sixteen or something and went on the grand tour of France, and talk about him on the Committee of Public Safety that signed away the lives of lots of people, but may have also saved the revolution.You can do whatever you want. Well, it should have something to do with the course and in the time period we’re talking about. Nothing on the Red Sox or something, but you would work with your teaching participant. I’m an email animal. I’m always available on email, and I have office hours as well, but people don’t come much anymore. They’re doing NBA.com, because email has made office hours sort of oblivious. I mean, irrelevant, not oblivious. But people are oblivious to my office hours. But, anyway, they are Mondays, 1:00 to 2:30 p.m. It used to be 3:00 p.m., but I just sit there by myself, 1:00 to 2:30 p.m. in Branford College, K13.There are also two other movies when we get to fascism, when we get to Adolf Hitler. He was only one of a whole bunch of dictators. There were hardly any parliamentary regimes left in continental Europe by the time 1939 comes. A woman called Leni Riefenstahl, who just died in 2002 at age 102, when she was a young woman did a propaganda film for Hitler. Hitler, like Mussolini, believed in high tech. He was one of the first people to use the radio. Franklin Roosevelt used the fireside chat of the radio. But Mussolini was already there piling falsehood upon falsehood, and Italians who could barely afford to eat all had their radios. The same thing happened in Germany as well. She did a movie, a documentary called Triumph of the Will, about Nuremburg. It is truly chilling. It’s amazing, it looks like a political convention or something in some ways.All of these movies you can see in the privacy of your luxurious suites in Branford or Pierson College or wherever, because they’re available now in ways I don’t even understand, but on your Internet. We used to actually show them here. I used to use a great movie called The Sorrow and the Pity, Le Chagrin et la pitié. It was four hours long. People described it as a two six-pack movie. The janitors complained because there were so many beer bottles rattling around. But, of course, this was before the drinking age was raised. So, of course, I don’t show that movie. I take that back. I don’t take that back, but what the hell. Anyway, I don’t show that movie anymore. But I do show Triumph of the Will, and you can watch that at home.The other one is Au revoir les enfants. Because one of the last lectures I talk about resistance and collaboration in Europe, and because I live in France much of the time, I talk about France. Au revoir les enfants, Goodbye Children, some of you have probably seen. It was made by Louis Malle, who just died a couple of years ago. It was about when he was in college, so he was the equivalent of 7th and 8th grade. There was a new boy that shows up at school during World War II in Fontainebleau, which is just southeast of Paris. He’s a boy who hadn’t been there before. He’s a Jewish boy. It’s about his friendship with this boy, and what happens. At the end, it’s not a happy film, but it’s a great, great film. What else? What to say?There’s a midterm. I don’t like to waste a lecture giving a midterm. I would rather give a lecture, but we have to have something to report to you. If you tube it, if you don’t do very well at all, we don’t count it as much as if you do well. People ask these questions, I know. How much is it worth? Geez, there’s more to life than grades, but it’s something like twenty-five percent and the paper is twenty-five percent. Section participation is ten percent, whatever we work out, then the final. It’s an exercise in seeing how you’re doing. It really is no big deal, but it will help you pull the themes of the course together. It’s no scary situation. We all live in this sort of A-, B+ range.I’ll tell you, a couple of years ago I ran into this student. When I run into students, I’m a friendly guy and I see people, and I say, “Hi, how are you?” I ran into this one person. I said, “Hi, how are you?” And she went, “Oh, hello.” Oh? I remembered her name and I went and looked it up, and there was the B+. It wasn’t that, “Hi, how are you? A- or A,” but whatever. I’m sure she had all A’s in the other courses, and a B+ is not the end of the world, and most people get A’s, but whatever. You have to take the midterm. That’s the way they run it here. That’s not my idea, so that’s what we’re going to do.Okay, now I’m going to talk about some of the themes. At the end, I’m going to read you a poem. I started history in a serious way because I read this poem. So, I’ll leave that until the end of it. I didn’t got to Yale. I went to the University of Michigan, maize and blue forever, very sad since last weekend. I came from Portland, Oregon. I don’t know if any of you come from Portland, Oregon, but that’s where I’m from. When I went off to Michigan, I’d been at a Jesuit high school. Jesuit high school was a sports factory, in part, but it was a very good school, but it was very repressive. I went off to the University of Michigan after having been in Jesuit school for four years. It was wine, women, and song. There weren’t enough in the middle and probably too much of the first. My first semester I got a 1.93 grade point average, and my mother asked me if that was on a two-point scale. I’m serious. I had an F. I shouldn’t laugh at myself. My kids say, “Oh, my god, not the same story again.” But I got an F, and I got two C’s, and I got a B.The people I hung around with in Ann Arbor were so unaccomplished, some of them anyway, that they thought I was smart because I got a B. I’d go by in the dining room and they’d say, “He got a B.” They asked me to tutor them. Can you imagine that? Some of the people that I hung around with were amazing. You may even know people like that, but I don’t think so. But one of the guys that I knew, I’ve got to get back to the topic in a minute, but I just thought of this, was sort of the king of malapropisms. One day he was going on and on. These are the people I hung around with. He was going on and on about this good meal that he had of one course after another, and it was fantastic. It was a really good restaurant, and somebody snuck him some wine. Finally, I’m tired of the whole thing and I said, “Was it gratis?” He said, “No, it was chicken.” Those are the people that I hung around with at the University of Michigan. But I’ve taught here a long time and I stand by maize and blue, but I love Yale.One of the things I love about Yale is being able to teach people like you. And I mean it, and I love this course, so I hope that you will enjoy it, if indeed you take it. What about some of the themes? What kind of stuff are we going to do? Could you get some syllabi for some of those folks back there? They’re up on the thing. Thanks a lot. A couple of themes. I don’t believe, and I’ve never believed, that history is a series of bins. I guess I wrote that in the book, but that you open up and you say, “Well, there goes the Enlightenment. Shut that baby down.” Then you open up the next one, and here comes eighteenth-century rivalries, and you shut that baby. Then the French Revolution, “Oh, I know all about that now.” Pretty soon you go on to Russian Revolution eventually, and all that. To do a course like this where you’re going to learn much of what is important to know about western civilization, I do believe, if you do the reading and stuff, and if you enjoy the lectures, there have to be some threads that go all the way through that make it worth it so you learn something. One is certainly state-making.Even if you take a sort of federalized, decentralized state like with this very bizarre electoral system like the United States, that the growth of modern states, it doesn’t really just come in the twentieth century with the welfare state beginning in England, and even before that in some other places, insurance programs and things like that. It begins with the consolidation of state power in the late Middle Ages with territorial monarchies, the Spanish, and the French, and the English monarchies. It has a lot to do with the growth of absolute rule. That’s what I’m going to talk about next time, absolute rule, absolutism. The growth of standing armies, huge standing armies, never seen before, of big forts built on frontiers. It has a lot to do with bureaucrats who could extract resources from ordinary people. A lot of the rich didn’t pay anything or hardly anything at all. It has to do with an allegiance, a dynastic allegiance that could be transferred later to a nation, the idea of nation. That starts in the eighteenth century. It doesn’t start in the nineteenth century. It starts in the eighteenth century, at least in Britain. That’s an argument that we’ll make also.In 1500, which is kind of when that book gets rolling — they only start in about 1648 — there were about 1500 different territorial units in Europe. Some were no bigger than Archbishop’s Garden in Germany, and some were larger states — not yet what they are now in terms of size, such as France, which expanded under Louis XIV into Alsace and Lorraine, and various other places. But there’s about 1500 territorial units. In 1890, there were thirty. So, the consolidation of state power, which is looking at it from the state out, or the emergence of an identity where you see yourself as German as opposed to Bavarian, French as opposed to Gascon or Provencal, Spanish as opposed to Castilian or as opposed to Catalan. The Catalan language was illegal until 1975, until Francisco Franco finally croaked in 1975, in November.This is a great phrase; I wish I’d said it originally. I don’t know who said it, but someone once said that a language is a dialect with a powerful army. That’s it. That’s true. France at the time of the French Revolution, half the people in France knew French. There was bilingualism. You could know Catalan. You could know Auvergnat patois. We live in the south of France where a lot of old people still speak a patois, though that’s mostly dying out. How does it come that identity, a sense of allegiance to a state or a country? Not everybody, but how does it come to 1914 when people go marching off to get killed singing the Marseillaise, the French national anthem, in pretty good French? How does that happen? How does a state increase its reach? How is the modern world created? We call this process, it’s a clumsy word, but state-making. How do states form?The other side of this is how do identities change? In the sixteenth century, seventeenth century, ask somebody they were. Say, “Who are you?” They’d say, “I’m so and so. I’m of this family.” Or, “I am Protestant,” if it was the sixteenth century or late sixteenth century, any time after 1520s or 1530s in parts of Germany. “I’m Protestant. I’m Jewish.” In much of the Balkans, “I am Muslim.” In most of Europe, “I am Catholic.” In Eastern Europe, “I am Russian Orthodox. I live in a mir (village) in Russia.” How does that happen by the end of the nineteenth century that people have, even Russia as they’re starving to death, starving in the famine that Tolstoy, the great writer, called the world’s attention to. A lot of them died in fields thinking, “only if the czar only knew that we were starving, and that his ministers were treating us bad, how angry he would be.” Well, they didn’t get it. They didn’t know that the czar could have given one damn. But the allegiance to the czar, the sense of being Russian or being dominated by the Russian czar, is something that had to be constructed.So, the state constructs its ability to extract taxes, extract bodies for national armies, also to provide resources, but identities are transformed. So, I give this as an example, because state-making is one of the themes that kind of ties everything together. This course ends in 1945, but look at the problems in the post-communist world of state-making. Look what’s going on in Georgia, which is more complicated than the newspapers present in very many ways. Look at the horror show of the Balkans in the 1990s. A lot of the issues, religious hatreds that we thought only would be limited to Northern Ireland. That’s another theme that’s very important to the whole thing. Another, of course, is economic change.Obviously, this is not a course in economic history, but the rise of capitalism, that’s what it’s called, capitalism or large-scale industrialization. It changes in ways that we’ll suggest in the reading, and then I’ll talk about a little bit, the way people live in very fundamental ways. There’s lot of continuities, but there’s lots of big changes. Everybody doesn’t end up in the assembly lines right away. There are other ways of rural production. Women’s work remains terribly, terribly important. I’ll spend some time doing that.A very dear friend of mine, my mentor indeed, Chuck Tilley, who just died a couple months ago, to my great sadness, once said that “it’s bitter hard to write the history of remainders.” Lots of people were left out of all of this. I’ll do one lecture when I talk about popular protest. I’ll take three examples of people rebelling. I stand back and say, “What does this mean? What is going on here?” I take the example from the Pyrenees Mountains, a place called the Ariège. You’re not responsible for that name, would never be. But where suddenly men dressed as women carrying guns, or carrying pitchforks, came down out of the mists, out of the snow and drove away charcoal burners and drove away forest guards. Why? Because they’d lost access to glean, to pasture their miserable animals. Because the wealthy, big surprise, got the law on their side as the price of wood goes up. They didn’t walk around saying, “Well, I’m a remainder. Eventually, I’m going to have to move to Toulouse and my great-great-grandchildren will work in the Aero Spatial, in the air industry there.” They didn’t say, “I’m remainder number 231.” But they fought for their dignity, and for a sense of justice they thought existed at one time that had been taken away by these economic changes they couldn’t control.Then I take an example from the south of England, from the same time, 1829, 1830, when they find people dead with only dandelions in their stomach, dead of hunger. Then these people start marching the poor, the wretched poor. Rural laborers start marching and threatening people with threshing machines. Why threshing machines? Because threshing machines were taking away their work as harvesters. And one day they found a sign that said, “Revenge from thee is on the wing from thy determined Captain Swing,” suggesting that they were many. They were righteous. They were just. They were armed. They were ready. Did Captain Swing exist? Of course not. They were weak and they get lost. They get defeated. Some of them are hung. Lots of them are sent to Tasmania to the prison at Port Arthur, Tasmania. They’re sent to Australia. That’s why when the Australians play the English, a lot of the Australians sing that old Beatles’ song, “Yellow Submarine,” which you don’t remember, which I vaguely remember. “We all live in a convict colony, a convict colony, a convict colony. Captain Swing, they lost, but they went down fighting. It’s bitter hard to write the history of remainders. But when you look up from that and you say, “Look what’s going on here.”When you look at people fighting for grain, fighting for food, they’re fighting a larger process that they can’t control. But it tells you a lot of what’s going on over the big picture. That’s another one. Then there is, I’ll just take one more, maybe another ten minutes. I’m going to read you my poem. Then you can go. But I hope you come back. War — war as a dynamic of change. Warfare changes with Napoleon. There were already changes in the eighteenth century, but it’s still basically professional armies or people getting conscripted in the British navy, because they were drunk at the wrong place at the wrong time outside of a tavern in Portsmouth or something. The next thing they know, they’re throwing up on a ship bobbing off toward the English empire. But warfare changes with the nation’s state. The French called it leveé en masse, that’s mass conscription, the sense of defending the nation. There’s this magic moment where the artisans of Paris defeat the highly-professionalized army at a windmill called Valmy in the east of France. It changes the way things were.Napoleon is arguably the first total war, because of a war against civilians where there are no longer the traditional limits between fighting against civilians and fighting against armies. Those limits hadn’t existed in the Thirty Years’ War. I’ll talk a little bit about that next time around. But the wars are very different. There’s famous Goya paintings of peasants being gunned down by French soldiers, and atrocities against peasants in Calabria in the south of Italy. So, warfare really changes, but it becomes a dynamic of change. If you think about the Russian Revolution of 1917, the Russian Revolution was not inconceivable without World War I, but it was sort of inconceivable without the Russian Revolution of 1905, and the defeat by the Japanese in an extraordinary shocking event, at least for Europeans in 1904 and 1905. And World War I provides opportunities for dissidents in Russia to put forward their claims.So, when the whole thing collapses on the czar’s head in February 1917, and the Bolsheviks come to power, the war itself was a dynamic of change as well. And what a war. What wars. There have been nothing ever like it. A few journalists who had been in the Russo-Japanese war had seen trenches in Manchuria that had been built. But nobody could have imagined that the war that was supposed to be over in six weeks was going to destroy four empires — the Ottoman empire, the Austro-Hungarian empire, the German empire, and the Russian empire, and, arguably, we can talk about this and we can debate this, the British empire. Because lots of people who had fought in India, Indians who had fought in the war, or people now we would call Pakistanis who’d fought in the war, or people from Kenya who’d fought in the war are no longer going to be satisfied with simply arguing that they’re part of the great empire, even though they have hardly any rights and no money, and simply work for the big guy.So, the war transforms Europe by destroying these empires. What it also does, and it’s very possible to argue this, and my friend, Jay Winter, who is a great expert on World War I, and Bruno Cabanes also, who’s on leave this year, would agree with this. You could see the whole period in 1914-1945 as a new and more terrible Thirty Years’ War. Because Europe is in depression all through the 1920s and ’30s, agricultural depression the whole time. Only between 1924 and 1929 is it not a big industrial depression. The poisoning of the political atmosphere — I’m going to do a whole lecture on Hitler and the national socialists. World War I created Hitler. He was already just this pathetic guy with grandiose plans, no friends, and sort of a sad sack going to the theatre and droning on and on about all he knew about Wagner, whom he loved, and the theatre, and in a threadbare coat. But World War I transforms him into an anti-Semite. He was already an anti-socialist. It transforms him into an anti-Semite.The troops that came back, many of them simply kept on marching. They’d survived the war and they kept on marching. The poisoning in the political atmosphere was something that was simply extraordinary. To understand fascism, this is terribly, terribly important, you have to understand what happens in World War I. Great expectations dashed the Treaty of Versailles, which only the great British thinker, John Maynard Keynes, really got right, predicting the disaster that came out of it. There’s no more fascinating period in history, in my mind. It’s absolutely fantastic. What a war. It’s all obvious. Everybody’s seen these films from Imperial War Museum — which has been kind of wrecked the way they’ve done it now, it’s sort of too high-tech — in London. But I leave you with just a couple thoughts. The Battle of the Somme in 1916 that started on July 1st when they blow the whistle and say, “Over the top, guys.” There are more British soldiers killed and wounded in the first three days of the Battle of the Somme, S-O-M-M-E, three days, three days, than there were Americans killed in World War I, Korea, and Vietnam combined. In three days.Where are the great British leaders of the 1920s and the 1930s? They’re all dead. They’re hung up on that old barbed wire, as one of the war poets put it. They’re hung up on that old barbed wire. One guy, a soccer player, said, “We’ll get some enthusiasm.” He tried to dribble a ball across these trenches, across the craters. He doesn’t make it. He’s killed. In 1914 on Christmas Day, the Germans and the British soldiers, some would say, “Enough of this stuff” for the day. They sing to each other. They actually play soccer; they play football. In 1915, a British soldier said, “Let’s do the same thing.” They put him against the wall and shoot him. The horror of the war transforms Europe, every aspect of Europe.It’s impossible to understand the growth of the agrarian sort of semi-fascist regimes in Eastern Europe, very much under Nazi influence, without understanding World War I. The war that was supposed to end all wars; of course, it doesn’t do that at all. That’s a big stop on our agenda as well. We did used to read All Quiet in the Western Front, but everybody’s read that. Then we read Robert Graves’ rather long and self-indulgent Goodbye to All That. That was pretty long, so we don’t do that. But we will try to rock.Let me just read you my poem and then you can go. Well, you can do whatever you want, but anyway. I remember this. I remember reading this poem back at University of Michigan at 2:00 on a Saturday, trying to figure out what I’d done the night before. But, anyway, no.This is Brecht, the great East German poet. It’s called “A Worker Reads History.” Let me begin by saying that we’re going to study “great,” I mean really “great” men, “great” women. Hitler is obviously not a great man. He’s awful, just awful. But the people who are thought to have made history: Napoleon, Peter the Great, other people. I do talk about the folks that you read about in textbooks, including mine. But I ask the same question and pose to you the same question that Brecht poses. It’s a short poem, so just hang on.Who built the seven gates of Thebes?The books are filled with the names of kings.Was it kings who hauled the craggy blocks of stone?And Babylon so many times destroyed.Who built the city up each time? In which of Lima’s houses,The city glittering with gold, lived those who built it?In the evening when the Chinese wall was finishedWhere did the masons go? Imperial RomeIs full of arcs of triumph. Who reared them up? Over whomDid the Caesars triumph? Byzantium lives in song.Were all her dwellings palaces? And even in Atlantis of the legendThe night the sea rushed in,The drowning men still bellowed for their slaves.
Young Alexander conquered India.He alone?Caesar beat the Gauls.Was there not even a cook in his army?Philip of Spain wept as his fleetWas sunk and destroyed. Were there no other tears?Frederick the Great triumphed in the Seven Years’ War.Who triumphed with him?Each page a victory.At whose expense the victory ball?Every ten years a great man.Who paid the piper?So many particulars.So many questions.If you hang with us this semester, we’ll get at some of those. See you. Thank you. Thank you.Professor Frank Snowden: The first thing I want to say is that there’s a thesis to the course, that you don’t have to share, but that I’d like to test for the next twelve or thirteen weeks. And that thesis is that infectious diseases are too important to leave solely to the doctors. Epidemics, in other words, have had an impact on history that I would regard as equal to that of revolutions, wars and economic crises. They are part of the big picture of historical change, and not some exotic special interest. Epidemic diseases have had an enormous impact on religion, on the arts, on the colonial expansion, on the establishment of New World slavery, on the rise of modern medicine, and on strategies of public health.To examine this thesis, we won’t be looking at all diseases. We’ll be looking only at a subset of high impact infectious diseases that have affected Europe and North America. So this means certain exclusions. We won’t be looking at chronic diseases, such as cancer, heart disease, diabetes, asthma, obesity. We won’t be examining occupational diseases such as miner’s lung or asbestosis. We’ll eliminate also a whole range of tropical diseases that haven’t had a major impact on the industrial West, such as dengue, or sleeping sickness, or Chagas disease. All of these, and other diseases, I would agree entirely are important and worthy of study, but it would take far more than a semester to examine them all, and lumping all diseases together would lose all coherence.Epidemic diseases — that is, high impact, infectious diseases — make sense intellectually as a separate category of analysis. That is to say they were, and still are, experienced differently from chronic disease, and give rise to distinctive fears and anxiety. As you can see in your own day, having heart disease can be a frightening and even a lethal experience. But it’s qualitatively distinct from being diagnosed with HIV/AIDS, or, up to the middle of our century, with syphilis, or being stricken with Asiatic cholera. Cardiovascular disease can have massive impact, but it doesn’t give rise to scapegoating, to mass hysteria, to outbursts of religiosity, to works of literature and art.So, epidemic diseases are distinctive and have left a particular legacy in their wake. And since our interest is in history, we need to note that throughout human history, until the twentieth century, and still today in the twenty-first century in the developing world, infectious diseases have been the most important cause of suffering and death. Infectious diseases today are the leading cause worldwide of death, and one of the jobs of our course is to give an explanation of why that’s so. Furthermore, we’ve had a number of recent scares from new diseases like SARS, avian flu, swine flu.We’re living in the midst of a global experience with the persistence of HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria — and these events remind us that epidemics are still major threats, even in the industrial world. Indeed, how we deal with them may be an important factor in whether and how we survive as a species. So, the course will raise the question of how prepared we are today. What are our major defenses against microbial disasters? How do they evolve? How robust are they? And what are the most important sources of vulnerability today?Well, then, let’s think about the geography of our course. Our focus will be primarily on Europe and North America; and I wish to say entirely for reasons of manageability. And you’ll be grateful because if we attempted to include the whole of the world throughout the period, and all tropical diseases, you’d have a reading list that would be four or five times as long as the one you have. But I would also say that when we come to the twentieth and twenty-first century, and deal with such global pandemics as HIV/AIDS, malaria and tuberculosis, we will look quickly a little further afield. It would be perverse to discuss HIV/AIDS without paying attention to Africa, which is its place of origin, its epicenter, and the place where the disease is causing almost unimaginable burdens of suffering and loss.We’re inescapably part of a global world in which microbes refuse to recognize political borders, and we have to take that into account. So, that’s the geography, focusing on Europe and North America, but branching out for the very modern part of the course. Chronology: when, what period do we cover? Well, really we look at the centuries from 1600 to the present. We’ll start with everyone’s idea of a worst case scenario in terms of epidemic disease; and by that I mean bubonic plague. And we’ll end with the current situation and the latest threats to have emerged, like SARS, avian flu and swine flu. As a student, I always felt disappointed when history classes on the modern period didn’t come right up to date. So I feel a motivation to bring us up to the newest papers today. In fact, one of the goals of the class is to help equip ourselves with the critical tools we need to confront today’s events, in a more informed and productive manner.Since I’ve mentioned influenza, we’ll certainly ask in passing — and I hope some of you will answer the question — why it is that the most threatening pandemic afflictions of the twenty-first century seem to be respiratory diseases? Why is that? How did that come about? Then I want to talk with you for a couple of minutes about the diseases that we’ll be examining. I’ve told you so far the ones we mostly won’t be looking at. Well, first, what are the criteria by which I’ve chosen them? First, I’m going to be looking at epidemic diseases that had the greatest social, scientific and cultural effects. We’ll call them high-impact infectious diseases. That’s a first criterion, their impact.Second, I’ll be looking at diseases that have had the most important role in the development of public health strategies to contain them. A major concern throughout the course is the variety of efforts that societies have made to prevent, contain, cure and eradicate infectious diseases. Our course is not only about disease, but also about public health, and so we’ll give that a privileged place; to that and to those diseases that stimulated various styles of organized and effective societal responses.A next criterion is that we’re going to look at those diseases that were the most feared killers of each of the centuries that we study. We’ll also want a varied diet, in other words diversity, and to that end some of our diseases will be bacterial, some viral, some parasitic. Some will be transmitted sexually, some through the air, others through food and water, and some are carried by insects. And by these criteria, we’ll focus in particular on bubonic plague, on Asiatic cholera, smallpox, syphilis, tuberculosis, polio, HIV/AIDS and yellow fever, with influenza bringing us right up to date.So, those are the diseases we’ll be concentrating on. Well how do we deal with them? What’s our strategy? What’s our way forward? And I want to stress that this is not a biology course but a history course. Epidemic diseases are biological events, and we’ll need to have some understanding of what they are, where they come from, how they were transmitted, how they affect the human body. It would be inconceivable to study the history of medicine without coming to terms with the medical and biological aspects of disease. Indeed, one of our goals will be to examine major changes in medical thinking and philosophy. But the biology will be throughout in the background, and the exams and the papers will not test you specifically on that aspect of the course.Our concern will be with the impact of disease on society, religion and culture. But we want to do a lot more than examine a series of ghastly biological invaders; although we will do that. And so the course will stress a number of long-term themes. The first of those I’ve already told you about, and that’s public health strategies. We’ll look at vaccination as a strategy; quarantine and sanitary cordons; urban cleanups and sanitary movements; sanatoria, as for tuberculosis; magic bullets like quinine, penicillin, antibiotics. And we’ll also look at an unfortunate public health policy, by which I mean concealment, to hide the presence of disease, as China did during SARS, but following a long precedent in which other governments have a history of adopting similar policies; and we’ll be looking at that too.Then we’ll be looking at intellectual history. Epidemic diseases, in other words, had a leading role in the development of the modern biomedical paradigm of disease, with the germ theory and such disciplines as tropical medicine and infectious diseases. And I’ll want to argue, or at least will be testing the idea, that perhaps medical ideas, one of their aspects is that they’re ideologies, held not only for scientific reasons, although that’s true, but also because of the kinds of societies they promote, or the power they convey to nations or strategically placed elites within them. That will be a question we’ll be examining.Then we’ll be looking at ethical issues: What are the ethics of human experimentation? And we’ll be looking at some horrific failures in ethical standards, and in particular we’ll examine the Tuskegee Syphilis Study. We’ll also be looking and thinking about diseases as a tool for the historian: as a means of casting revealing light on how societies are constructed; on the relations of human beings to one another; on the moral priorities of statesmen and religious leaders; on the relationship of human beings with their environment, by which I mean both the natural environment and the built environment, the cities in particular in which they live.Responses to epidemic diseases will be important to us. How did people respond? And we’ll be looking at stigmatization, witch-hunting and scapegoating; at flight and mass hysteria; at upsurges in religiosity; at changes in art and in philosophy. The course will also try to provide some understanding of a number of major concepts and terminology in public health. By the end of the class, you should be fluent in using words like etiology, case fatality rate,nosology; and you should know the difference between incidence and prevalence, between an epidemic and a pandemic, between inoculation and vaccination.And then another theme will be an assessment, as I said, of where we stand today in the twenty-first century. What have we learned as a society from the experience of the past four centuries of recurring and dreadful epidemics? In 1969, the U.S. Surgeon General had a premature surge of optimism in the age of antibiotics and he declared, as he put it, “We’ve turned the page on infectious disease.” And medical schools and the public health community taught that it would be possible to eradicate one epidemic disease after another, like smallpox or polio as models. But our Surgeon General turned out to be spectacularly wrong. Today, in 2010, infectious diseases are the number one cause of death worldwide.It’s also clear that it will be impossible to write the history of the twentieth and twenty-first century without giving a central place, at the very least, to HIV/AIDS, and to other pandemics as well. Furthermore, we know too that there’s a whole host of emerging diseases: Ebola, Lassa fever, West Nile virus, SARS, avian flu, AIDS and, of course, swine flu. And familiar diseases have re-emerged in resistant and threatening manners, such as drug resistant tuberculosis or malaria, and other diseases as well. So, the threat has been made clear in dress rehearsals we’ve had in our new century: SARS, avian flu and, as we speak, swine flu.And indeed, the nature of modern society may make us more vulnerable, rather than less, to such threats. We’ll want to think about some of the factors that may make that true, such as a high and ever-growing world population density, as we rapidly reach a figure of seven-billion people, before very long; rapid movements of population by rail, road, cruise ship, but above all the airplane; rapid and chaotic urbanization, with the appearance of ever more mega cities, with populations in excess of ten-million people; places like Tokyo, Mexico City, Lagos, Delhi, Mumbai, New York, Jakarta, Buenos Aires and others. These, many of them, conjure up images of overcrowding, of poverty, substandard housing, inadequate access to healthcare, extensive illiteracy, open sewers.Then there’s the perennial problem of warfare, and the terrible dislocations that wars leave in their wake: Displaced people; refugee camps; the collapse of health systems and sanitation; extensive poverty and widening social inequalities; climatic change and environmental devastation; and the failure to provide such basics as safe and adequate water supplies for untold millions of people in the developing world. Unfortunately, not one of those factors seems likely to abate in the near future, and some of them are gathering momentum as we speak. Well, it’s possible, and reasonable even, to ask whether it is true that the way we handle epidemic diseases will be crucial to our survival as a society. In addition, I would argue, that it’s important to examine these diseases, the ones that have been most prevalent, as they hold up a mirror to ourselves.I would argue that every disease, and epidemic disease in particular — these are not random events — that every society has its own specific types of affliction, and to study them is to learn about its living conditions, its moral priorities and relationships. For all of these reasons we could argue that epidemic diseases are great bearers of meaning, and our job is to decipher the meaning embedded in them as contemporaries experienced them, and to understand them retrospectively. Well, then, that brings us to our first couple of weeks, and where we go next.On Wednesday we’ll roll up our sleeves and get down to work, looking at the meanings that Europeans gave to epidemic diseases when they first struck the continent and as they were seen through the lens of the reigning medical doctrine; that is, the humoralism philosophy developed by Hippocrates and Galen. At the time of plague in the seventeenth century, humoralism, which was the first embodiment of what we might call scientific medicine, was still the dominant medical paradigm for disease, as it had been for nearly two millennia. And so our first task will be to examine a topic in intellectual history of medicine; a topic that will help us to understand how the first epidemic disease that we’re going to study, bubonic plague, was understood, how it was experienced by physicians, statesmen and educated laymen. We’ll also be in a position then to understand that epidemic diseases fundamentally challenge humeral notions, and help to lead to a major intellectual paradigm shift that we’ll discuss later in the semester.So, our course then will begin with the legacy of two of the most influential doctors who ever lived, both Greeks: Hippocrates from the fifth century B.C., and Galen from the second century of the Common Era. Looking at their philosophy of medicine will give us a framework to understand the ways in which the experience of a plague was a tremendous shock. Most obviously it was a shock in terms of death and suffering, but it was also a shock because it undermined the foundations of medical and intellectual understandings of disease. The passage of bubonic plague through European society was not only a biological and material event, but also a major intellectual, religious and psychological one.Having done that, next week what we’ll do is turn to bubonic plague itself. Now, the plague is everyone’s candidate for the worst-case scenario. A plague is synonymous with terror. One reason was that it was an extraordinarily rapid and excruciating killer, with symptoms that were dehumanizing and agonizing, with no effective therapy, and a kill rate that ensured that the majority of its sufferers perished. It was also readily transmissible, so that it seemed poised at various times to destroy the whole population of Europe. And it did kill an enormous proportion of the population; up to half in major European cities. So, here was the origin of a terrifying cliché about plague: that it struck down so many that there weren’t enough people left to bury the dead.So, what will we do next week? Well we’ll look at symptoms of plague, its horrifying effects on the individual human body. We’ll look at its devastating impact on society, and at the responses of whole populations to the time of plague: mass flight; scapegoating; social disorder; upsurges in religion; new cults of saints; new iconographies in the arts. But there’s more to it than that. The plague led also to the first successful strategies of public health to combat pestilence; strategies that were often draconian, in direct proportion to the magnitude of the threat. These strategies included, as we’ll see, boards of health, with almost unlimited powers during the emergency: quarantine; military lines and naval blockades to isolate cities, or even whole countries; and we’ll see pest houses to confine and isolate the sick and dying.As a guide to our experience we have this book, which is Daniel Defoe’s Journal of the Plague Year; which is the first reading assignment. And I want to talk about it for a minute, because some of you may want to start reading it straight away. I’m not too good as a salesman, but I do think it’s appropriate to make a plug for great books. And in this case, of Defoe, I want to introduce one of the classics of a whole genre of what you’ll become familiar with as plague literature. Defoe’s masterpiece is a powerful description by a contemporary — in fact a survivor — of the most dreadful outbreak of bubonic plague in the history of the British Isles; the catastrophic visitation of 1665.Plague had returned in successive waves in European history, ever since the first visitation of 1347. But one of the terrible features about it is that over the centuries it didn’t become milder, and some of its last visitations were the most violent and horrendous of all, including the epidemic that ravaged London in 1665. Now, a possible issue for some may be overcoming the barrier of language. So I want to throw out a challenge. The book, I will admit, can start out a bit slowly for some of you. So I want you to think not so much at the outset, as you open it up, as to whether you immediately enjoy it; although I’m hoping that you will. But I want you to think instead about why it’s so important.I’d like you to think about what you can learn from being in the company of someone who had the experience of living through the worst of all public health calamities, and to ask yourselves why this book has been read avidly for four hundred years. It may interest you also to know that during the SARS outbreak in Toronto in 2003, thousands of people were quarantined in their homes, and at the top of their list of books that they read to pass the time and make sense of their experience, was this one: Defoe’s Journal of the Plague Year. Well, history, after all, is in part about sharing a common culture and common memories, and reading this book then is certainly part of that. And if you think of it in those ways, with those questions in mind, I think — and this is my secret agenda — you’ll really enjoy it.I also think that you’ll find that it’s a wonderful account of how a society responded to one of the greatest of all challenges. Defoe recounts the flight of the king and other authorities from London, in fear for their lives. He tells us about religious enthusiasm; about how people understood the catastrophe they were experiencing, what it meant to them. He tells us about the hunt that was on for witches and scapegoats and culprits. He talks about plague-induced crime; the helplessness of physicians; about popular culture; and desperate attempts of people to save themselves; and then about the extreme measures of shutting people up in their homes by government authorities, or taking them away by force to pest houses. And since this is a comparative course, I’ll hope that you’ll begin to reflect on how far we’ve changed and progressed from the time that Defoe wrote. And I’ll draw your attention, for example, to the early years of the HIV/AIDS epidemic, and we’ll think together about some possibly very troubling similarities.In fact, one of the constants in the centuries since the plague itself, in the West, has been a tendency in times of public health crises to resort to plague measures of self-defense. We’ll see that very dramatically in the nineteenth century, in the time of cholera, when the desperate attempt was made to stop Asiatic cholera with measures that had worked against plague, but turned out to be entirely counter-productive. And we’ll see it again in the early years of the AIDS pandemic, and in that case too with haunting consequences. So, now you know where we’ll begin: on Wednesday with medical science, in its first but long-lasting embodiment, and the way that Europeans experienced plague, through the lens of humoral theory. And then next week we’ll deal with the most devastating epidemic to strike the Western world, bubonic plague; and in Daniel Defoe you have a really good guide to accompany you on your journey. So, I’ll see you next time.Professor Keith Wrightson: Right. So this is History 251, and this morning I want simply to introduce the class and to explain what it might offer to you.First of all, it’s obviously an outline course. It deals with a large period of history, 200-250 years, covering what I describe in the title as ‘Early Modern England’. Well, that’s a label that may or may not mean very much to you. I could have called the course ‘Tudor and Stuart England’ and indeed that term is used in the subtitle. It is about England in the reigns of the Tudor and Stuart monarchs running roughly from the 1480s to the 1710s. But to call it that might suggest that the course is structured around the rulers and that like so much history the focus is very much on the top. Well, in part it certainly is. In introducing the political narrative, which will form part of the core of the course, I’ll certainly be looking at the lives and the times of the great figures who gave their names to the age, the faces on the coins you might say. The notorious Henry VIII and his six unfortunate wives who are always difficult to remember in the right order — and Lucy, you have a helpful phrase for this, yeah?Student: Divorced, beheaded, died, divorced, beheaded, survived.Professor Keith Wrightson: Okay. Divorced, beheaded, died, divorced, beheaded, survived — the lucky one. Henry VIII. The stunning and rather perplexing Queen Elizabeth I — Gloriana, Good Queen Bess, the Virgin Queen. Whether you imagine her as Cate Blanchett or as Judi Dench  she still has the glamour, a woman who announced to her people early in her reign that she would “not make windows into men’s souls.” She would “not make windows into men’s souls.” And she’s continued to resist the efforts of most historians to try to make windows into hers. And then there’s the four Stuart kings. James I described at the time as “the Wisest Fool in Christendom,” a man who after an adventurous youth as King of Scotland became King of England and it was said treated every day thereafter as if it were Christmas day. Charles I, his son, whose policies precipitated Civil War in the mid-seventeenth century and who was eventually put on trial and executed by his own people in 1649. His son, Charles II, restored to the throne after ten years of republican government, Charles known as the Merry Monarch, the man who was energetic principally in his pleasures, famous for having innumerable mistresses and fourteen illegitimate children, never — though no legitimate children at all — never happier than when swanning around St. James Park with one of his mistresses and his spaniels. The — you know the King Charles spaniel — a nice, little black and white spaniel? Yeah, named after him of course. And the King looked rather like a King Charles spaniel , you know when he had his wig on — the nice, curly ears as it were and he had nice brown eyes too. . And then his brother, James II, former Duke of York, came to the throne and after three years was driven from it in the second English revolution of the seventeenth century, driven in to exile, later known as the King Over the Water by those who remained loyal to him. Well, it’s been said that two of the Stuart kings were politically astute but morally defective and two were virtuous men whose political ineptitude cost them the throne. To paraphrase Oscar Wilde, we could say of this remarkable dynasty that to lose the throne once could be considered a misfortune but to lose it twice suggests a certain amount of political ineptitude.Well, you will hear and read about all of these people and the many others who shaped England’s public destiny and political destiny in this period, and others too — and today is September 3rd, which reminds me of Oliver Cromwell. He was born and died on September 3rd and also fought his two greatest battles on September 3rd, which is probably no coincidence. It was his lucky day. The great puritan general, the Lord Protector of the English republic between 1653 and 1658, a man described as a man of ‘agonies and exultations,’ a quite extraordinary figure. An idealist in some ways, ahead of his time on religious toleration for example, in other ways tainted by the bigotry of his age, and historically perhaps more loved and more hated than almost any other figure in British history.So there are the great ones, but there’s also much more to it than can be approached by focusing on such figures alone. And if about a third of the lecture course is devoted to the political narratives and the — and understanding how they unfolded — the rest is devoted to other aspects of the period, to its religious history, to its social history, aspects of its economy, aspects of the culture of the time. These are matters which might sometimes have been vitally influenced by the decisions of rulers, but they also developed in their own independent ways and they obviously involved a far larger cast of characters. So this course is very much about the common people too and their experience of the age as well as about those who ruled them. So like one of the great Hollywood epics we have a cast of millions. That’s why I’m using the more capacious, if vaguer, label “Early Modern England,” by which I mean simply the broad period between the end of the fifteenth and the middle of the eighteenth century which saw the laying down of what were to become the essential characteristics of modern Britain in government, in religion, in economy, in social structure, in culture, in political values.So I’m inviting you, then, to take a journey of the imagination through two and a half centuries. But you might say that was an awfully long time ago. This is the kind of history that’s long dead, that’s drowned in time. Why should you concern yourselves with the distant past, so remote from your own contemporary experience? Why bother with England or Britain? Why does it matter? Well, I’d say there are at least three good reasons for exploring deep history and in a way that takes us way beyond the immediacy of a more familiar historical world. First of all, because to do so is imaginatively enriching — it involves rediscovering a lost world and that takes imagination. Secondly, because it’s also intellectually demanding. All history, of course, involves us in a fairly rigorous intellectual discipline. We have to develop arguments about causation, about why things happened the way they did, and we do that by establishing a dialog between the questions that we want to ask and the evidence which the past has left to us. Well, my point is simply that that can be a peculiarly enthralling exercise for periods of the distant past for which the evidence is often ambiguous or difficult or partial, in which it’s produced by unfamiliar institutions, in which people are thinking with unfamiliar casts of mind, and we have to try to think ourselves into those minds to understand what was happening in their own terms, informing our causal arguments. That can stretch you imaginatively and intellectually. And thirdly, and perhaps most importantly, because it creates meaning. It helps us to understand ourselves in time in a deeper way by exposing twenty-first century attitudes and values and experiences to a much deeper comparative context. Looking at the distant past can alert us to the sheer otherness of the past, to the reality of deep and fundamental change in the course of four or five centuries and to the provisional and contingent and temporary nature of so much that we take for granted today, as well as the family resemblances which can still be found. That’s an exercise which can be enormously provocative and stimulating, a challenge that helps us understand better our own place in time.Right. Well, the story of early modern England has got a good deal to offer in all of these respects. It can certainly capture the imagination. This was a time of great events: the Reformation, the civil wars of the seventeenth century, the foundations of the first British empire. It was a time of great personalities: the rulers that I’ve already mentioned, but also it was the age of Shakespeare, of Milton, the time of the diarist Samuel Pepys, the proto-democrat John Lilburne, the early feminist writer Mary Astell, and so one could go on. It was a time of great processes as well as events: longer-term processes, great changes in the structures of society, in economic development, in political culture, in the growth of literacy and print culture. And it’s also the period when, almost for the first time in British history, we have the evidence surviving that enables us to get to grips with the mass of the population and to explore the everyday dynamics of their lives, their relationships, their emotional palettes you might say.It’s only from about the early sixteenth century that the sources survive in large quantities that enable imaginative historians to approach questions like how long do people live? How subject were they to early death from diseases like the plague? What age did they get married? Who chose their marriage partners? What was the quality of their family relationships? How many people could read and what did they read if they could read? How did people make their livings and how did the economy change? What were the levels of crime and violence and how well were they controlled? — and a host of other questions which are not previously accessible because we don’t have adequate sources. So one can begin to get a sense of the rest of the population, and to give you just one particular example, around about 1900 a box of papers were found in the cellars of Worcester College, Oxford, and they turned out to be the papers of the secretary of the council of Oliver Cromwell’s army, and they included a verbatim shorthand account of debates which had taken place in 1647 at the end of the Civil War when the council of the army debated the settlement of the kingdom in the aftermath of the war.One of the extraordinary things about this verbatim account is that you hear the voices of the common soldiers. One of them who is representing a cavalry regiment keeps interrupting the debate. He keeps saying, “What has the soldier fought for all this time?” He uses the phrase again and again: “What has the soldier fought for?” And it’s thrilling because you hear for the first time the voice of the common people erupting into the councils of the nation. Well, that symbolizes in a sense what the available documents enable people to do from the sixteenth century onwards.Secondly, looking at early modern England can engage the intellect. The historical literature is exceptionally rich. It’s very large, created by generations of historians from all over the English-speaking world, and quite a few of them or significant of them were Yale scholars. This literature has produced many of the classic works of historical writing in the English language and it’s also proved to be restless and innovative and rather argumentative. All of the recent movements in historical research and writing are represented amongst its practitioners; mainstream political and constitutional history, gender history, the ‘new social history,’ the ‘new cultural history’ influenced by critical theory, what people now describe as the ‘new political history’ which tries to reintegrate social and political development. All of this is represented and much more. Since the 1960s in particular it’s been one of the most vigorous of historical traditions. There’s plenty there to engage the intellect, whatever it is that you happen to be most interested in.And thirdly, it helps to understand ourselves in time. Of course, all periods of history do that, but the events of the early modern period have a peculiar resonance. The events and processes of these centuries are of more than merely historical interest. If you’re concerned with the institutions of representative government and how they came into being for the first time; if you’re concerned with the notion of the rule of law; if you’re concerned with the structures and dynamics of a capitalist market economy; if you’re interested in concepts of individual liberty and collective responsibility, or with the excesses of religious fanaticism, or with innumerable social and cultural attitudes which continue to echo in our own relationships and in our own time, if we only know how to recognize them, and if you’re concerned with the language itself, then early modern England has got a great deal to say to you. It’s because these issues are so alive in the literature of the period that the literature is so rich, and it’s for that reason also that it’s very much an international literature.These issues concern scholars from all over the world and there’s a further dimension to that too, which is that a great deal of what happened in sixteenth- and seventeenth-century England later impacted upon a much wider world. The history of early modern England is, by extension, very much a part not only of British history but also of American and Canadian, Australian, and New Zealand history. It’s got things to say about the history of India and of Africa. Some of the things that happened in this period left their fingerprints all over the world in all kinds of ways. They — it certainly left its fingerprints on New Haven to come close to home. If you look around the town and you look at the churches: Episcopal, Presbyterian, Congregational, Baptists, Quakers, all of these religious traditions have their origins in sixteenth- and seventeenth-century England. Or if you look at the street names. Running out of Broadway we have Goffe, Whalley, and Dixwell streets, all three of them named after three of the men who signed the death warrant of King Charles I in 1649 and later hid out in New Haven, which was a radically puritan colony which gave them asylum after the return of the king. Our suburb of Hamden is named after John Hampden who, in 1637, stood up against the policies of King Charles I and tried to fight him in a landmark legal case. And if you start turning to other place names in Connecticut it just gets ridiculous. We have New London, okay, as old London. We have Norwich, or ‘Norrich’ as it’s pronounced in England, it’s up there. New Haven itself is down here. We have Litchfield, that’s over there. And we have Durham — is up there. And we have Stamford, which is there, yeah. We have Greenwich, which is over here. Same place names, they’re just in a different configuration and, in a sense, that’s symbolic of the relationship between British and early modern — early American history: same names, different configuration, slightly different meanings. So in a sense a good deal of this is American history by extension and of consequence to everyone who’s become involved in America’s story over the last two and half centuries. To explore it is to explore part of your own identity.Right. Well, this course is intended to provide an introduction to all of this. It’s up to date. It’s also intended to be very inclusive in its range and contents. We’ll run through from the late fifteenth century to the early eighteenth century. We’ll look at the momentous changes and innovations which took place. In 1500, England was very much a personal monarchy. The king really ruled. By 1700, it’s a constitutional monarchy in which the center of political life was a permanently sitting elected parliament and it’s become not simply the Kingdom of England but the United Kingdom of England, Scotland, Wales, and Ireland. In 1500, England was part of Catholic Christendom, practicing a very lively and vital form of late medieval Catholicism. By 1700, the country was aggressively Protestant with an established Church of England which could no longer contain all the varieties of Protestant denominations which had emerged, leading to the granting finally of religious toleration in the late seventeenth century. In 1500, it was largely a localized economy of peasant families and urban craftsmen. By 1700, it was a highly commercialized market economy, capitalistic in structure and engaged in trade with a much larger world, especially with the East and with the Atlantic. In 1500, it’s a world of rural communities and small towns with only one significant city, London. By 1700, it was the most rapidly urbanizing country in Europe, London had become the biggest city in Europe and a kind of prototype metropolis. In 1700, London was regarded as a kind of a shock city the way people thought about New York in the mid-twentieth century. In 1500, most people were illiterate. By 1700, literacy was widespread. There was a vigorous print culture including the first English language newspapers. And so one could go on and on, pointing the contrast between the beginning and the end of the period.The story of these and other massive transformations used to be told as a kind of a triumphalist story, an unfolding of British destiny, what people refer to as ‘the Whig interpretation of history’, a very nationalistic take on the history of this period. It traced the growth from the sixteenth century of political liberty, religious freedom, economic opulence, and world power as a kind of steady upward ascent. Sometimes it had to be hard fought against the forces of tyranny or superstition or backwardness, but in a sense it was portrayed as being almost preordained, a kind of English version of manifest destiny. Well, since the 1950s, the perspective has changed massively. Britain’s place in the world has changed. People think about its history differently. New forms of history have been pioneered. Other voices are now heard, especially the voices of the losers in these processes, all the people who only had a subordinate place in these achievements. As a result, we’ve now got a less one-sided and, in many ways, a more mature historiography. We’ve got over the old tendency to strut and swagger about Britain’s historical role. The changes of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries now seem very far from preordained and, as I say, the less one-sided perspective reveals the losses as well as the gains, the failures and the crimes as well as the achievements. The point is it’s all part of the story and it’s all available to be studied.Well, let’s look briefly at the syllabus. It’s roughly chronological. There’s a timeline running through the whole thing, but as it develops there are overlaps. I planned it as a kind of building up of layers of knowledge, each one acting as a kind of stepping stone to the next. In the earliest lectures, lectures two to six, I’ll concentrate on trying to establish some of the contexts of society, economy and government as they were in the early sixteenth century. I’ll be looking at the household, at local communities, at people’s social and economic roles and relationships, at the structures of power and authority as they were at the time of kings Henry VII and Henry VIII, roughly between the 1480s and the 1540s. That’s to establish the context because, as has been said, the discipline of history is essentially a discipline of context. Facts acquire their meaning only when one understands the context which helps us to grasp their meaning. So we’ll set up the context. Then from lecture seven we move into the tracing of change. Lectures seven and eight will look at the impact of the Reformation and the opening up of religious divisions between the 1530s and the 1550s. In lecture nine, we’ll pause to look at some of the problems which were produced by the massive population growth which began in the sixteenth century and the economic stirring which that produced.In lectures ten and eleven, I’ll look at the England of Elizabeth I, focusing on the problems in religion and in government policy faced by the Queen, the struggle for stability in the immensely insecure environment which she inherited, and then in lectures twelve and thirteen I’ll go on to look at some of the principal features of social change under Elizabeth and the early Stuarts, looking at roughly the 1580s through to the 1630s, a period of major transition in society and economy. Lectures fourteen through seventeen will look at various aspects of social and cultural change in the same period, the late Elizabethan, early Stuart period. I’ll look at the witch craze of that time. I’ll look at crime and disorder, at popular protest and rebellion and at literacy and education. Then lectures eighteen to nineteen, we’ll come to the religious and political tensions of the early seventeenth century which eventually exploded in 1642 into the civil wars — which I’ll look at in lectures twenty and twenty-one — and the establishment after the execution of King Charles the First of the English Republic which lasted until 1660. Lecture twenty-two will look at the restored monarchy after 1660, tracing it up to the revolution of 1688. Lecture twenty-three will look at the rapid economic development of the late seventeenth century which provided the resources to back the matter I’ll treat in lecture twenty-four, which was the creation of a new state structure and the emergence of Britain as a significant world power.So that’s the rough timeline. Those are the issues which will be covered. Obviously, the course has an essentially narrative structure but it’s also very much an analytical narrative. It’s about trying to understand how all of these changes intersected with each other, how they influenced each other over time. And I suppose that’s what really interests me, trying to grasp the wholeness of the process of historical change, how it all fits together, and that’s the best reason for doing an outline course of this kind. It enables you to see these developments in the round; all the different aspects; how they intersect.Now the readings which are suggested on the syllabus will help you hopefully to do all of that. They’ve been chosen quite carefully. The three textbooks are available from the Yale bookstore. The course packet of additional selections from various books and articles is available from Docuprint down on Whitney, the address is given on the syllabus and the phone number, and all of these works are also on reserve in the library, in Sterling. The reading runs at about 100 to 150 pages a week.Now some of the readings you’ll find are quite demanding, but I make no apologies for that. You can say it’s a mark of respect for the capabilities of the students that I’m setting some pretty challenging stuff at times. But if you follow the readings as we go through you should build up a coherent grasp of the whole period in its different aspects and be introduced to the work of some of the best historians currently writing about it. In a sense it’s a course in good, lucid, robust historical prose. The readings and the lectures together will provide the basis for the section discussions which will tend to develop and add to the lecture themes rather than simply repeating to them — repeating them — and two of the sections will be visits to the British Art Center to look at some of the visual evidence there. Those visits have to be on a Friday morning and they are optional; they’re not part of the examinable nature of the course but they’re there if you’re interested and would like to go along.Okay. Within the sense of the whole period, which I hope you’ll develop, you’ll be asked to do two pieces of more detailed work, a shorter paper of about five pages and a longer one of about ten pages, the first due in week seven, the second due in week fourteen. This should give you an opportunity to develop personal interests. You can have a completely free choice of topic. You can write your papers about any aspect of the period that you find interesting and you want to pursue more deeply. I’ll give out, in a couple of weeks’ time, a list of topics that might interest you, but feel free to bring forward suggestions of your own that you’d like to investigate, or things you might pick up from lectures that you want to take further and so forth. I’ll also issue a longer bibliography which will help to prepare for those papers and which will also include material. If you’d like to look at the history of Scotland or Ireland or Wales, then there’ll be material there on their developments also. All you need to do about the papers is to consult with me or with the teaching fellows to get advice on the best reading for researching the papers and subject to that you have a free hand, whether that’s some of the classical issues of the period or whether it’s other things that you simply have to — happen to have an interest in. Last year someone was interested in public health and ended up doing work on the plague and early public health measures, for example. We had a person also who was interested in pregnancy and childbirth. Well, you can do that. There’s a literature on it and so forth, whatever it happens to be. The overall assessment will be 15% for participation and discussion, 20% for the short paper, 40% for the long paper, and 25% for the final exam, which will be an exam in which you’ll be required to write two essays from quite a large choice of about twenty topics covering the whole range.Okay. Finally, let me introduce the teaching fellows. We have Courtney Thomas and Lucy Kaufman and Justin DuRivage. All of us will be available to assist you in section discussions of course. We’ve scheduled seven sections with quite a wide spread of times which hopefully will cater for everyone who’s interested, and we will be available, of course, in office hours. The teaching fellows will explain their office hours when sections begin in third week. I’ll be available usually on Tuesdays between five and seven and on Thursdays between two and four - p.m. in both cases. Right, other times by appointment and of course we’re all available by e-mail when necessary. Throughout, the basic teaching philosophy for this course is quite simple. First of all, history should be challenging but it can also be fun and, secondly, if students are going to do well they deserve attention; so if you want it you can have it.Okay. So this is a terrific period to study. It has a terrific literature to work on. Yale has a long and distinguished tradition in this field and fabulous resources for studying it in the libraries, in the British Art Center, in the special collections. My objective is simply to encourage you to engage with this field and to use these resources and to do well, to achieve your potential and to enjoy it. I’ve been teaching and researching and writing about this period for about forty years. Courtney and Lucy and Justin have been at it less long but they know their stuff. We have three teaching fellows who really know their stuff. They have their own special interests but they’re very familiar with the whole picture. We are in a position to guide you and help you get the most out of this course, and no doubt in engaging in discussion with you and in discussing your paper topics and so forth we will also learn from you. People new to the subject always see things that one’s missed no matter how long one’s been working on it. So we’ll be happy to do all of that. So if the course attracts you, take it and use it and use us to develop your knowledge and your skills. That’s what we’re here for, and if anyone wants to ask any particular questions just come on up at the end. Okay?Professor John Merriman: This is History of France, 1871 to the Present. And my name’s Merriman, and we meet Monday and Wednesday in this room, which is a pretty good room. And the third, the famous third hour to be arranged is a section. At the moment we have been assigned four TAs, though looking around we won’t need four TAs, but at the moment we have Da-Ihn Yoo, we have Michael Verriman, we have Andrey Ivanov, and we have Brian Reilly. And knowledge of French or anything at all about France is not required in this class at all.Some of you have had my introductory class, a lot of you haven’t. A couple of you have had the first half of this course, most of you haven’t. Many of you won’t be here the next day, that’s what happens with shopping period, and then the third day we see how many folks we have. We do have, for those people who want to take it, a travaux dirigés en français, we have a section that’s French speaking. It’s an idea that Chris Miller in the French Department and I came up with in the late ’90s, and my old dear friend Dick Broadhead provided the funding.And what this is, is that if you want to take the section in French, you should have about an equivalent of 130, and the discussion’s in French and a couple of the books — I’ll talk about them in a minute — you can read in French, the others you read in English. And it’s not a la-di-dah thing where — I’ll tell you, once there was a student in there who had really fantastic French and I said, “Why is your French so good?” And this person looked at me and said, “Well the maid was from Dijon.” And another time, somebody’s French was very good and I said, “Why is your French so good?” “Well mommy used to take us to Chamonix for the — pour les vacances d’hiver.” Or, “our apartment next to the Tour d’Eiffelgave me contact with zee French people.” And so it’s not like that, I assure you, it truly isn’t. And you’re not counted off for errors that you make in writing, either, if you’re writing in French; and it really rocks, trust me.We’ve done this for year after year. One year we actually had something like forty-two people signed up, and the course was much bigger, and we thought they all thought they were getting a free prize or something for signing up, there were so many of them. We ended up with about thirty-two. We’ve had a few with eight. As long as we have five it will go; but, it’s really fun and you’ll know people around here, if you’re above a first-year student who have taken this, and it really rocks, it’s really great. And Brian Reilly is going to do this. He’s from the French Department. So, I would encourage you, if you have that kind of interest, to do that. And you won’t regret it, there’s never been anybody who regretted doing it, and it’s just a lot of fun.The other sections will meet in English. And usually what we do in this course is we offer some night sections, because people are kind of busy, and so we — there’ll be certainly a section Wednesday at seven, certainly one Wednesday at eight, there’ll be certainly sections Thursday at 1:30 and 2:30, and the French section is tentatively scheduled for — what did we say? We said Wednesday at 1:30, isn’t that it? Or something like that. It all shakes down, and it is fun. Now what do you got to do in the course? Well you have to come with good humor, and that I hope you’ll have; come to the lectures and do the reading, see the films, which I’ll talk about in awhile, and go to sections, and hopefully participate in sections; and the sections tend to be fun in this course.So, as so far I know, you’re dying to know about midterm and final and those wretched things. I wouldn’t give a midterm, because I think it’s a waste of time, except we have to have some sort of — it gives you an indication how you’re doing in the course. If you screw it up we don’t count it as much as if you do well. And the final is — we will give you on the last day of class the questions for the final. We give you six questions. And we will ask you on the day of the final to respond to three of those — our choice, it would be hardly sporting if you got to pick the three.And we also give you an oral exam option that if you want to, say, not be here on Christmas morning taking your last final, because they tend to go to the twenty-third, you can just blow off those days and go off to Bermuda, or go home, or do whatever you do, and take the oral final, which we used to cheat and have it during Reading Period but they caught on to me and you can’t do that so — they frequently catch onto me — but so now we have it on the first two days of the Final Exam Period, and you sign up for — it is not an interrogation, it is a friendly exchange about the themes of the course. Most people, particularly in this course, do that, but it’s not necessarily an advantage to do it.People — this is not the course — if they’re doing, working hard in this course, this isn’t the one out of five they’re blowing off, then they tend to do that and instead of writing for three and a half hours and getting writing cramp — and inevitably our final exam was in that horrible place, Osborne Hall, where you’re sort of tilting like this, like you’re leaning out of an airplane, and you sit up there for three and a half damn hours writing your brains out, and you can have a sporty conversation of twenty-five minutes with one of the teaching assistants, and you’re out of there. So, that’s what a lot of people do; in fact, about two thirds of the folks do that. I have some very funny stories about those, but now is not the time to do that, especially because we’re being filmed. But most people do very well.Let me tell you a little bit about the reading. The books are available at the Yale Bookstore, Barnes &amp; Noble — here you guys, here’s some of these — and the textbook is a good textbook, it’s really good in cultural history. A guy called Chip Sowerwine, Charles Sowerwine, who’s a buddy of mine from — lives in Melbourne, in Australia, and it’s a good book. And the other books are, in their own way, sort of classics that you’ll enjoy. Now, many of you, if you’ve had French anything, have read Germinal, and if you haven’t read Germinal, now is your chance to read it. Zola was one of the first great naturalist writers and he would go up to the nord, to the Anzin, to the mines of Anzin, up here in the north of France, and he would go down in the mines and see how people worked. He would see how fifteen-year-old girls worked in the mine — Catherine, who grows up rather quickly in the mines. And germinal means “the budding,” it’s a reference to a calendar of the French Revolution. It also kind of implies hope, and it’s about what happens when people try to mobilize these braves gars, these workers in the mines. And if you’ve never read it, it’s a great, great, novel.A Life of Her Own is a book that I became obsessed with, oh, about five or six years ago. Emilie Carles was born in abject poverty in the High Alps, in the Hautes-Alpes near Gap, up really high in the mountains here, and she became a schoolteacher as a common sort of means of social ascension for a poor person from a village. She was born right near the Italian border, but just in abject poverty. She married an anarchist from the Department of the Ardèche, where we happened to live or are, at least were legally residents and spend much of our time down here; and she moved from one school to the next. And when she was a very old lady, she led a demonstration to try to protect her little part of France on the Italian border from being exploited by tourism, more about that at the end, and with her tractor she led this demonstration.It was a phenomenal thing, and she ended up on this very famous French television show called Apostrophe, with Bernard Pivot, who said that she was one of the most interesting people that he’d ever had on his show. And she died in 1977. And she published her memoirs; it was called A Soup Made of Wild Herbs. And of course it was translated into English with that title, and then they changed it to — what did they change it to in English? A Life of Her Own. And it’s about being a young girl and a woman, but it’s an extraordinary thing. I became so obsessed with it that we drove up there so I could visit every school at which she had taught, and we actually found somebody who — we knew he wouldn’t like her because he was sweeping out the church, he worked for one of the churches, and she was very anti-clerical. So, we actually met somebody who knew her; and the school is now named after her; but, it’s a wonderful, wonderful read, it’s just great. My family got a little tired of this and said, “do we have to — how many more of these places do we have to see in which this woman taught?” But anyway, we saw most of them.And then Henri Barbusse, who was a Communist, became a Communist, who was a writer in World War One and who served in World War One, and he wrote a great book which is called Under Fire that my dear friend and colleague Jay Winter has just written a new introduction for, and that’s about the horrors of the trenches. It’s just the sheer — it’s amazing, it’s an amazing read too. And then, Marc Bloch; I once had the pleasure when I was giving a talk at the University of Strasbourg and sitting in Marc Bloch’s office. Marc Bloch taught people like me in the way to do history.People like me grew up on reading Marc Bloch, though I assure you he was much older than me, and he created a way of doing history called the Annales School. And his first book actually was called The Healing Kings, because in Medieval French times and Medieval English times when a king was crowned there was this sense that if the king could cure you by touching you — excuse me for touching you. If you had scrophula, which was sort of a degenerative disease — it’s hard to find people who have scrophula anymore — the king could touch the person and cure it, and it became part of sort of the popular culture of royalty. And they tried this in 1825 with disastrous results; but, this was his first great book.And at the age of about fifty-five the war came along, and he wrote a book called Strange Defeat, explaining why in 1940 France fell so rapidly. And then he’d been — he was Jewish, and he was fired from his post in Strasbourg, under Vichy, that is the collaboration government of World War Two, because he was Jewish. And then he caught on at the University of Montpellier, and then they realized that he was a Jew, so he was gone. Then he went back to a farm that he owned in the Limousin, in the Creuze, up here near a boring place I used to work called Gerais. And he sat around and thought, “well, I’m going to do something.” So, not at a horribly advanced age, I would like to think, he went to Lyon, which was a capital of the Resistance because they have all these things called traboules in Lyon, was one reason — they’re passageways where you’d keep the silk, raw silk dry. But he got set up by somebody, by a French person — more about this in a minute, and he was supposed to meet somebody on a bridge overlooking the Saône River — Lyon was at the confluence of the Rhône and the Saône.You’ll learn a lot about France in here, but we don’t ask you questions like that, “what two rivers meet in Lyons?” But, he was set up and he was hideously tortured here and he was killed. So Marc Bloch taught us, in a way, how to do history. But he also, writing this book, taught us how to think about the past, and more about that in a minute, and how to think about what happened in France between 1940 and 1945. I do a seminar on that next semester.And then what? I forgot one, I forgot to put one in; no, no here it is. Sarah Farmer, who sat in the same classroom literally, before it was remodeled, had written a wonderful book called Martyred Village which first appeared, chez Gallimard, in France, and it’s about a village that I know very well because I used to live in Limoges, in which on the tenth of June, 1944, the SS, German troops came and simply slaughtered everybody. They shot the men, and they put the women and the children in the church, and they killed them. But what’s interesting about that is why this particular village became the symbol for martyrdom in France. Why? Because it was thought to be virgin, they weren’t resistors, they weren’t collaborators — it was there, it was martyred.And so, she wrote this book; but, what’s more interesting than that is that the people who did the massacre, in the SS, many of them were Alsatian. Now, Alsatians were French, even though many of them spoke German dialect. And so after the war they said we are the malgré-nous, we were put on trial because — we were in the Army because we were forced to be, because Alsace was the next — directly into Hitler’s Reich. And when they were acquitted, only two people who were condemned from those forces, they had joined voluntarily and the others, the malgré-nous were, “in spite of ourselves,” were pardoned. There were riots Limoges that they were pardoned. There were riots in Colmar and in Strasbourg, in Alsace, that they had been condemned at all. So identity, national identity is very complex, and we talk about the war — this is, it’s a sparkling account.And what they did with this village, ghoulish, you might say, is they left it just the way it is, or was, on the tenth of June 1944. They left all the buildings blown up or caught on fire, and they have crosses where people were shot, and there was, there used to be a ghoulish museum with a knife opened up that indicated they tried to defend themselves. And then now they’ve put in a centre de mémoire, sort of a memory site there, that’s kind of slick but it’s fine. A friend of mine who’s a senator is the president of it there. But they kept that village just the way it was, and they built one next to it. In about 1952 some people, about your age, started to party, and somebody came out with a gun and said we don’t party in Oradour-sur-Glane.So, imagine growing up in a place like that where the past was so — was written not only in the death of people that you knew, because everybody you knew died basically. One woman got out, she went through the — there was a vitrau, a window behind the altar, and she was able to get out. Anyway, so those — the reading is great. So, what can I say? I’m certainly biased but the reading is great, the reading rocks. Now, what about the films, the movies? Inevitably there isPaths of Glory, Les Sentiers de la Gloire. If you’ve never seen it, it’s a Kirk Douglas movie that’s a good movie, and it’s about the mutinies on the Western Front, and it’s very good. We used to say, well come to 101 and it’ll be a film that’ll be shown at 8 p.m. or something; but, nobody ever does that, they all watch it in the privacy of their rooms or you can go watch it — we’ll figure it out; but, it’s a really wonderful movie.And then you’ll see a film called Au Revoir, Les Enfants, sort of see you children, goodbye children. How many have seen Louis Malle’s Au Revoir, Les Enfants? Ah, many of you have seen it, it’s a great film. It’s a true story, it’s about Fountainebleu, which is southeast of Paris, sort of a fancy place, and it’s about his childhood when he was in collège;collège is a middle school — you’ll learn about French schools. My kids have been in French schools for many years so I know about these places. And he — one day this boy showed up in the class — this was during Vichy, about 1943, maybe it’s ‘44, and he’s new and he’s not different, he’s just not from there. He’s obviously from Paris, and he was Jewish. And it’s about the attempt — the role of the Catholic Church in Vichy is not a very savory one, the French hierarchy and many priests, but many priests were very heroic and when this particular priest, who was a real live guy called Père Jean, Father John, tried to hide this boy in the school so he wouldn’t be arrested and sent off to the camps, but he was denounced by somebody who was in the militia, the milice is what it’s called, which is sort of paramilitary thugs that worked for Vichy; and, of course, it does not have a happy ending.And then the last film, most of you won’t have seen it, called La Haine; hate, I guess you would translate that as hate, or hatred. And I’m very interested in what happened in the French suburbs two years ago; in fact, I wrote an instant article on it for an encyclopedia because some of the work I’d earlier done was about why French suburbs and European suburbs are different than American suburbs. American suburbs, many of you come from them — Hillsborough, California; Darien, Connecticut; Grosse Pointe, Michigan; places like that. That’s not what the suburbs are in Europe. Suburbs are where people unwanted by the center go, and the fear of the suburbs has been something that — by the prosperous center has been a very long, important theme in French history, particularly written in Paris; and I’ll talk more about that.And La Haine, which was a small budget movie, became this great success; and it’s a tough movie to watch, it’s tough, it’s verbally tough to watch, and it’ll have subtitles. But it was done in 1996 or ‘97, but it’s really superb. So, what kind of — I don’t want to give everything away — but what kind of themes do we have in a course like this, what have I forgotten about? Oh me. I’m Merriman, I said that, I still am actually, and sometimes I feel after a day like yesterday that I’m sort of, you know what, I’m not; but, anyway, my office hours are — when are my office hours? — Monday, one to three, in Branford College, where I was a Master long ago, K13, Branford College. And I’m also like everybody else on emails; and I’ll get your emails, panic emails at 3:10 in the morning and I’ll reply at 4:45. So, it goes like that.What kind of themes? Let me talk a little bit about some of them. Let me just talk about, oh, about three or four of them, just so you can see what hopefully you’ll be getting yourself into. And you’ll have fun, you’ll learn a lot about France, I’ll tell you that. Okay, one theme I’m interested in is — well let me tell you about lectures, first of all. I do not do chronological lectures, “well in 1882, and then it was followed by 1883.” I don’t do that. I lecture about what I like to talk about, what’s interesting, that’ll hopefully make you understand what the big issues are in all of this. So, that’s why it’s a good thing to come to lecture and also to read the books.But, one of the things I’m interested in is national identity, in fact because we kind of have complex attitudes toward our own identity I suppose, me and my family. But, if you took — and a few of you have heard me say this before so forgive me — in 1789 if you tried to guess how many people spoke French, in France, you might come up with eighty percent as a guess or ninety or whatever — it was about fifty percent. Some people were bilingual. So, what did they speak? Well, start anywhere you want. Breton, which is a language that has nothing to do with French at all — here, oh I’ve got a really funny story I was going to tell about a Breton priest, a French speaking Breton priest, but that’s for another day.Anyway, they spoke Breton here. Now, Nantes isn’t considered technically part of Brittany, but they spoke Breton there, which is basically a Gaelic language. And then if you go up, you think, well they spoke French there, certainly in Normandy, but they spoke in many parts a patois. In about 1844, this kind of crazy guy took a big knife and he slit the throat of his mother and his two sisters, and they were — the police were looking for him. And he was from Normandy, he lived near Cannes in Normandy, and they found him eating clams and things for survival on the beach. And they had to bring in a translator, somebody to translate. Before he was guillotined he dictated his life. The book, Michel Foucault, a famous philosopher, got a hold of and wrote a preface for it; in French is, was, Moi, Pierre Rivière, ayant égorgé ma mère and mes deux soeurs . And me, Pierre Rivière, having slit the throat of my mother and my two sisters, I’m going to tell it like it was. And he did. But the important thing is that they had to have a translator for him in the 1840s.When Bernadette of Lourdes, in 1856, believed that she saw the Virgin Mary, of course they had to have somebody come and translate there what was a mountain patois influenced by Spanish. But, if we’ll move north here, up here a lot of the people spoke Flemish, very few now. You don’t have to know this, it’s just kind of fun; I love it, but, anyway, and then in parts of Lorraine they spoke a German dialect that’s very much like what’s spoken in Fribourg. In Alsace almost everybody, as you will see later, spoke German dialect. But it didn’t mean, if you asked somebody, “Are you French?” and they reply in German, “Yes, I’m French,” that doesn’t — language doesn’t necessarily tell you how people feel about their identity. Some sage once said, I don’t know who it was, but I love this expression, that a language is a dialect with a powerful army.Look at Spain. Why was Catalan illegal to publish until Franco croaked in 1975, clutching the left elbow of St. Therèse or something another? Because Castille, Spanish speaking Castille, with its command economy, had conquered the Basques and conquered the Catalans. And so, all this will change during this period. Or, if you move further down, you get into Savoie, which was Savoy, Hautes-Savoie, Savoie, which were next in 1860 and they spoke in essentially Piedmontese, they spoke an Italian language. If you go to Provence then, Provençal is a written language. You get a sense of that if you see a really great movie like Jean de Florette, with the inevitable Gérard Depardieu who’s in every single film made this side of Disneyland, Disneyworld, he is there; but, with Daniel Auteuil, who was fantastic, he had to put one of those things that dentists put in your mouth when they’re going to give you an x-ray that make you feel uncomfortable in order to pronounce perfectly this Provençal language. And it’s not just the accent of “ain,” “quatre-vain” or “enfain” instead of enfin — it’s a whole language.And, moving along here, you get down to Catalonia, to French Catalonia, speaks the same — we still know old ladies down there who speak Catalan, the same language spoken down all the way to Valencia, at least along the coast. You move in here, you go to Basque country — besides all the patois, you go to the Basque country, Basque is only remotely related to Finnish and to Magyar, to Hungarian. And then you’ve got all these, you’ve got over in the patois here, you’ve got Limosin patois. You’ve got all these languages. So, the only point of interest about this is that when do people start thinking that they’re French, as opposed to from a certain family, from a certain village, from a certain region? When do they start thinking of themselves as French? And this has been hotly debated in the literature for a very long time.There are still people now that live — there’s a woman that lives near our village and she’s lived in our village, she was born in the next village, and she’s lived in our village for forty years because she married a guy from the village; and she’s from the next village, about twenty football throws away, or a little more than that. And somebody as a joke once asked her, “how do you feel living in this village after all these years?” And she said, “oh sometimes I get homesick.” There was a sense that she’ll never be from the village, she’s from somewhere else; but, sometime between 1750 and maybe 1990 most — almost everybody in France began seeing themselves as French. And the schools play a major role in this and thus all these kids who grew up speaking patois or Provençal or Gascon — I forgot Gascon, around Bordeaux, they can sing the Marseillaise in acceptable French as they march off to be slaughtered.When do peasants become Frenchman, as someone posed. And it’s an interesting question, because it tells you a lot about regional identity and about national identity. And the role of the schools is important in that because what happens is that the Virgin Mary gets elbowed off the walls by Marianne, the female image of the republic, and that, it starts with the French Revolution, but it’s a very long process. So, we’ll talk some about that, but not that much.I guess the other two themes I want to discuss, and not in great detail, but — are the wars. Obviously, World War One is — unleashes the demons of the twentieth century; nobody could have anticipated that all these empires would collapse. Anti-Semitism was out there before that, in Germany and France, as you’ll see with the Dreyfus Affair, all sorts of places; but, World War One transformed Hitler from a man who hated social democrats, who hated socialists, into a man obsessed with killing Jews. World War One has an enormous impact on the way people viewed themselves, in France and everywhere; everybody knew people who died in the war. It was the defining experience of the twentieth century, and the violence of the war continues into the 1920s and ’30s.So, you can see the whole period till 1945 is an even more horrible thirty years war than that of the seventeenth century. There are 35,000, 36,000 communes in France, that is administrative units. Paris is a commune, but so is a village of twelve people, is a commune — 36,000. In World War One, only twelve didn’t have somebody killed. France in the 1920s was a country of widows dressed in black, of people missing limbs or coughing their lungs out from the poison gas, if they were lucky enough to survive, putting huge strains on welfare systems — obviously it was very important that they be taken care of, in a country in which the birthrate had stopped in most of the country in the mid-nineteenth century — unique in the world. There weren’t enough men to go round, they were dead.You can go into villages and towns almost anywhere, particularly in the lower Massif Central, down here, and you can find in towns of just tiny, tiny towns, seventy-four. I’m a counter, I count things all the time, it drives me crazy. I’ll count up the number of people killed in every church that I go to visit to look at. It’s simply extraordinary. We can’t even imagine what that’s like. There are only three people left in Britain who fought in World War One, only three, and they’re about 110-years-old or something like that. But it’s difficult to understand what the impact was, and the poisoning of the political atmosphere.We’ll talk about the Battle of the Somme, s-o-m-m-e. And the Battle of the Somme, in the first day of the Battle of the Somme, the first of July, 1916, there were 20,000 British soldiers killed. In the first three days, just counting the British, there were more British soldiers killed and seriously wounded than there were Americans killed in World War One, Korea and Vietnam combined, in three days; comparable chilling effects in Russia, and in Britain, and in Austro-Hungary as well. Where was the flower of English youth, this used to say? Well, they were hung up on that old barbed wire, they were dead, and your life expectancy wasn’t very good, because of foolish military decisions, because of a war that ended up being the war fought in which no one, outside of a few people who had seen the Russo-Japanese War around Muckton, could have ever imagined.The finest, some of the finest books on any topic are those — of history — are those on World War One, the great war in modern memory of the British — of Siegfried Sassoon, about Siegfried Sassoon, and Wilfred Owen whose mother got the news that he’d been killed on the day of the armistice. There’s an extraordinary literature, the close concurrent, the close competition for that, the richest literature would be the Spanish Civil War with Orwell, and Borkenau and Brennan. But, we’ll talk a lot about World War One, how it started, what it meant, and what the impact was. And there’s nowhere you can go in Northern France where you’re not just awash with military cemeteries around Reims there, anywhere up in the end near the Chemin des Dames. These are battlefields in which every day — in fact, in the Battle of the Somme there was one casualty for every meter of the entire front of the war, of that particular battle — it’s really extraordinary. And it goes — it went on and on and on. And we’ll talk about the impact of what this happened, there were obvious impacts, but what happened on civil society and on politics.Where were the leaders of the ’20s and the ’30s? They were dead, they were dead, killed at eighteen, killed at nineteen. I was in The British War Museum, the Imperial War Museum the other day, and I’d been there four or five times, and I went — and they have a thing where you can look up dead people. And so I said, well, I wonder if there’s somebody with my name who was killed. And there was. And my uncle had an extremely odd — my grandfather had an extremely odd name, and there was somebody of his name too that was killed. They all died. And it was — not everybody, but in France 1,500,000 people died, and that’s a huge demographic chunk, it’s like a big shark took a big bite out of your basic pyramid of your demographic tree.And something like Hitler — this isn’t a course on Hitler but it’s from the other course — but why this guy who had no friends, who was just a pain, just a pain, he was so peinible, he was such a pain; and he had one guy that he used to bore with his stories about architecture and painting, and Wagner whom he loved dearly. And you could never imagine that he would be somebody that people would listen to on the radio, hour after hour, because that’s how long he talked; or that when Stauffenberg tries to kill him in 1944 the Germans would pour out of the — into the street to thank god for saving the Fuhrer. Why did he become somebody Seig Heil? He was one of the guys, he was one of the gars, he was one of the guys. He’d been wounded three times, and he was a runner, he carried messages to the trenches, from the generals who were all drinking champagne in Reims, to the front. And he was wounded three times, and he was one of them. He had that stamp of having been one of the guys.And the violence keeps going. You have to explain why all of this has happened, and you have to find people that made it happen, and it was the Jews, and it was the socialists, and it was the communists, and it was the homosexuals, and we’ll kill them all. And that’s what he did. And for the point of view of France, they emerged from the war with the reality that they are in victory a weaker nation than Germany is in defeat. And so it’s a big shadow over the whole damn thing — incredible. And Marc Bloch, when you read The Collapse of France, it’s very interesting, interesting stuff.World War Two, I’ll give you two stories. When I was working in a place called Tulle, which is down here — t-u-l-l-e, not Tours, but Tulle — I knew vaguely that there had been a massacre there in June sixth, 1944, and a lot of people had been hung. I didn’t have any money. My kids would say, “oh dad, not that I don’t have any money story again.” But I didn’t have any money and so I would be eating ice-cream and I got to know this guy with my not very good French then, and we talked and I said, “do you remember the day the Germans came back and hung all those people?” And he said, “yeah.” And I said, “well how did you get away?” And he said, “well,” — Tulle is in a, there’s a big valley, it’s a real long town, and these houses have balconies like this. So he went up and he hid. He was twelve, he would’ve been killed, fourteen, they didn’t care.And one day so I was eating my ice-cream because the archives were closed, and this woman came up, and she was probably about fity, or something like that, and she ordered ice-cream, and so this guy says, “well, Madame whatever, Madame Dupuis, you remember that day don’t you, when the Germans came back?” And she said, “oh I sure do, they hung my husband from that pole.” And that pole was right next to this ice-cream stand in front of the theater in Tulle. And that was 1970 — more about that in a second.And I have a friend who’s a Parisian lawyer who works in Africa a lot, and when he was a little boy the Germans came to get his father who was a Greek Jew, and he was taken away and killed, of course. And one shouldn’t forget that the people who rounded up the Jewish children in the Marais, where lots of Jews lived, were French — the Germans would’ve been happy to do it — but were French police, they were French police. And his father was denounced by a policeman, by a policeman. And after the war that policeman directed traffic at the market every Saturday, and the widow walked by and saw this man, knowing he had denounced her husband who had been taken away and killed.Now, in 1970 there was still this collective amnesia in France. The myth, perpetuated by De Gaulle, the big guy, was that in France everybody had resisted except for a few elites, and then France had risen up to follow his great shadow and had thrown off the oppressor and founded a republic. In 1953 there was a documentary made about the deportation of Jews, from Paris, and there was a film made about this. They put together a documentary, and in one of the scenes it’s a camp place called Drancie, which is out near the airport, halfway to the airport, to Roissy Airport. And there was a French gendarme who was guarding the French Jews, a French gendarme guarding the French Jews, and they lifted him out of the movie; they literally took him off the screen. So if you see it, he ain’t there. Why? Because the image was nobody collaborated or hardly anybody, and everybody resisted.Now, that amnesia which — and part of it was De Gaulle didn’t want to give the communists credit, because they were the party of 75,000 martyrs, because they were organized and they resisted; other people did too. There was a Catholic resistance, there was your basic Gaullist resistance. I remember when De Gaulle died I was in Paris. I was the only person frisked going into Notre Dame, literally, that I saw. They threw me up against the wall and checked me out, because I was a kid and I wanted to go there and see, just for the purpose of history, of being there.But, De Gaulle perpetuated this myth about the resistance. And then there were cracks in the myth. And the first crack was a movie that’s so long that it used to be the janitors, the people who cleaned these — the very nice people who cleaned these rooms used to call it a two six-pack movie because it was so long. I’m not supposed to say that, we’re filmed. Cut that baby out of there. But, it’s about a four-hour film, and it’s called The Sorrow and the Pity and it’s about Clermont-Ferrand, which is in the Massif Central here. And there’s some amazing scenes in it where they shave the heads of horizontal collaborators, which is sort of a crude way of talking about French women who slept with German officers — horizontal collaboration.And at the end of the movie, there was Maurice Chevalier. Maurice Chevalier was a crooner, he was a singer, he was — if your parents knew about France, he was the person that your grandparents even had heard about, and he was somebody from a poor part of Paris, and he was from Ménilmontant, and he had this straw hat and he sung tunes — “very good my boys,” and all of this stuff. And at the end of the movie he says, “You know, there are zese very bad rumors about me, and that I sang for zee German troops, and I want to tell you I only sang for zee boys,” that is, for the French interned soldiers in Germany then. It may have been true or maybe not, but it made people start looking at the past, what really happened between 1940 and 1945, or ‘44, end of ‘44, what really happened.There was a trial of a very old man in 1998 called Maurice Papon, tried in Bordeaux. And he did very well after the war. He had signed during the war all sorts of slips that sent Jews off to the station, the Gare St. Jean in Bordeaux, to the train station, to be shipped off to the east; but, he did very well, he became a minor Gaullist official, and he did very well, and they finally caught up with him. And he said, “I’m a good bureaucrat, I did — they were pleased with my work. I signed those fiches, those formulas and if I hadn’t been there to save the hundreds then they all would’ve died.” And he was — but you can’t put somebody 90-years-old in the slammaire. And so, he was in kind of in this very minimum security and he finally just croaked a while ago. One point that he tried to — he escaped actually, with the help of some friends, and they found him dining in an elegant Swiss restaurant. It was too — it was trop beau.But, anyway, so the other thing that happened was a friend of mine, I’m very proud to say, called Robert Paxton, wrote a book called Vichy France, and he had to use captured German documents because the French documents weren’t open, they were not available, because the big secret of collaboration should not be known. And we’re going through in France the same thing now with the War of Algeria too — but more about that later. So, give me two more minutes, I’m going to end, and a few of you, faces, I’ve heard this before, people that I know; but, I guess one reason why I’m in history — well, because I read a book a long time ago. I didn’t know what else to do, and I read one book that really influenced me. But, I also read a poem, and this is kind of a signature — not my signature, but the kind of course it is. Because you’re going to hear about de Gaulle and you’re going to hear about fancy people, but you’re also going to hear about very ordinary people who were caught up in kind of the torrent of the twentieth century and the late nineteenth century. So, let me just read you this poem, it is short, and it’s a Brecht poem and it’s called “A Worker Reads History.” And then you can go home, or go shop, shop till you drop, whatever.Who built the seven gates of Thebes?The books are filled with the names of kings. Was it kings who hauled the craggy blocks of stone?And Babylon, so many times destroyed.Who built the city up each time? In which of Lima’s houses, The city glittering with gold, live those who built it? In the evening when the Chinese wall was finishedWhere did the masons go? Imperial RomeIs full of arcs of triumph. Who reared them up? Over whom Did the Caesars triumph? Byzantium lives in song.Were all her dwellings palaces? And even in Atlantis, of the legendThe night the seas rushed in, The drowning men still bellowed for their slaves. Young Alexander conquered India. He alone? Caesar beat the Gauls. Was there not even a cook in his Army? Philip of Spain wept as his fleet was sunk and destroyed. Were there no other tears? Frederick the Great triumphed in the Seven Years War. Who triumphed with him?Each page a victory, at whose expense the victory ball?Every ten years a great manWho paid the piper? So many particulars,So many questions.”And if you hang around, as I hope you will, we’ll get to the bottom of some of them. Have a good weekend!