Chapter 1. Introduction and Course Overview Professor Tamar Gendler: So, welcome to Philosophy and the Science of Human Nature. It’s nice see so many of you here today. I hope to see more of you here again on Thursday. And my goal today is to try to give you a sense of what kind of course this is going to be so that you can make an informed decision about whether this is a course that you actually want to enroll in for credit.With that aim in mind, there are three things I want to do in today’s lecture. In the first part of the lecture, I’m just going to give you a very broad overview of what kind of course this is, and to say a few words about what my goals are for the course. In the bulk of the lecture, what I’m going to do is to run through three examples of the kinds of topics that we’re going to be addressing this semester, so that you have a sense of what kind of material we’re going to be talking about. And in the final section of the course, I’ll say a few things about what it is that makes this course distinctive, and a few things about the course’s requirements.So the course has this perplexing cross-listed title. It’s called Philosophy and the Science of Human Nature, and it’s listed both in Philosophy and in Cognitive Science, and it’s a course for which you can get credit in the Psychology major. So what kind of course is this? Well, in some ways, this is a course like Directed Studies Philosophy or Philosophy 125-126. That is, we’re going to be reading works by Plato, by Aristotle, by Epictetus, by Boethius, by Hobbes, by Hume, and by Mill–all major philosophers from the Western philosophical tradition. We’re going to be reading them roughly historically, with an attempt to get at some of the kinds of questions that one would get at in a traditional philosophy course.In addition, you’ll get some of the material that you would get in an ethics course. So one of the topics that we’ll cover in Philosophy and the Science of Human Nature are the three main ethical theories in the Western philosophical tradition. We’ll talk about utilitarianism, we’ll talk about deontology, and we’ll talk about virtue ethics, and we’ll talk about how those relate to one another.You’ll also get some of the materials that you would get if you took an introduction to political philosophy course. We’ll very briefly look at the work of Thomas Hobbes on the legitimacy of the state, and then we’ll read and think about the debate between John Rawls and Robert Nozick about how much weight should be given to the relative values of equality on one hand and liberty on the other.So in that regard, this is, in some ways, a standard philosophy course in the moral and political tradition. It’s not a course in metaphysics; it’s not a course in epistemology; it’s not a course where we’re going to be talking about issues like free will or the mind-body problem, all of which could legitimately fall under the topic of philosophy of human nature.But what’s distinctive about this course is that in addition to the contributions that are made by the philosophical side of the equation, we’re also going to be drawing from a number of other disciplines. So one of the main themes of the course will be to think about how the questions raised by the traditional philosophers that I’ve mentioned already are picked up in the contemporary cognitive science tradition.In particular, how they’re picked up by what I see as one of the main strands in contemporary cognitive science, the strand that looks at the relation between human beings as rational creatures, capable of a certain kind of calculated and reflective understanding of themselves and their place in the world, and, on the other hand, human beings as evolved animals who are subject to forces that lie beyond their rational control.In light of that recognition that human beings are capable of being affected in multiple ways, we’ll look at a number of writings from psychology. So we’ll read some Freud; we’ll have a discussion of cognitive behavioral therapy; we’ll talk about post-traumatic stress disorder; we’ll have discussion of happiness, using a wonderful book written by a Yale alumnus, Jonathan Haidt. We’ll look at some work on self-regulation, on love and friendship, and we’ll also look at empirical work on topics like moral reasoning and punishment, and social psychological work on situations and attitudes.So a lot of the material that we’ll address in this course will come from psychology. But some of it will also come from the tradition of political science. So in the course of discussing the legitimacy of the state, we’ll introduce ourselves to the notion of the prisoners’ dilemma. We’ll talk about the tragedy of the commons, and in the closing section of the course, we’ll talk about the role of rhetoric and argument in political persuasion.We’ll also draw from the field of behavioral economics. One of the reading assignments is to listen to Daniel Kahneman’s Nobel Prize speech, accepting the Nobel Price on behalf of himself and his collaborator, Amos Tversky, for the extraordinary work they did founding behavioral economics. But we’ll also look at some additional work in the dual processing tradition, and we have some excerpts from Dan Ariely’s delightful book, public book on behavioral economics.Finally, we’ll even draw a little bit from literature. We’re going to read a short excerpt from the Iliad; we’re going to read a short story by Ursula LeGuin; and in the second to last lecture of the course, we’ll look at what Plato has to say about the role of literature and artistic representation in affecting human self-understanding.So what I’m going to try to do in the course is to bring together these eight fields in a way that provides a coherent story about what kind of things human beings are, and how we can learn about what kind of things human beings are from these various perspectives.In slogan form, the structure of the course is dead guy on Tuesday, cog sci on Thursday. Except not all the philosophers we’re reading are dead. And not all of them are guys. And not all the other fields are cog sci. And in fact, most things are going to be covered together on Tuesday and Thursday. And there are going to be sections. But other than that, the slogan.So that’s an overview of the kinds of disciplines that contribute to the course. Let me say a bit about the specific topics that I hope to address in the course of the semester.So the first overarching topic, and I roughly organized the syllabus under these three topics, but in some way, each of them will keep re-emerging throughout the semester. The first topic is the topic of happiness and flourishing. What does the ancient Western philosophical tradition say about what it takes for human beings to thrive in a meaningful sense, and how does that connect to work that’s been done more recently in various literary and scientific traditions about what it is that enables human beings to flourish? What is it about human nature that can give us some clue about what kind of thing authentic happiness might be? That’s the first set of questions that we’ll address.It turns out that the ancient philosophers’ answer to that question is that human beings thrive when their souls are well-ordered, to use the ancient metaphor. When the parts of their souls that might pull in different directions are in a certain kind of harmony; and the ancient picture is that when that happens, human beings behave in a moral way.And so the second part of the course will look at both what it feels like from the inside to behave in ways that are conventionally considered moral, and from a higher level, what it is that we mean when we say that an act is moral or immoral.So as I mentioned, we’ll look at the three main Western philosophical conceptions of morality, and we’ll also look at some interesting related questions. Like, why is punishment justified when it is? And is the justification for punishment psychological or ethical?And in the final unit of the course, we’ll move beyond the individual into society as a whole, and ask some questions about what it is that makes political structures legitimate, and how it is that state or civic institutions ought to be organized in order to allow human beings to flourish.So those are the three main topics that we’ll be addressing, and as you can see, on the syllabus that I’ve handed out, there are highlighted examples of a few of those particular topics that we’re addressing on page one of the syllabus, and a much more detailed set of questions on pages three and four.But in addition to being about the content of these questions, this is also a course that’s going to encourage you to think about the methodology of each of the disciplines from which we’re drawing. So it’s my goal to introduce you to a number of traditional philosophical discussions of the human being, but it’s also my goal to get you to think about what these philosophical discussions have in common, and why it is that thinking about things in the way that philosophy thinks about things can be valuable for answering questions that we care about.And we’ll do something very similar with respect to the other disciplines. We’ll look at the literature from psychology and behavioral economics and political science and literature, and we’ll ask: what is it about this distinctive approach to answering these questions that provides us with a complementary insight on the issues that the philosophers have raised?And finally, I’m going to ask you to think not only in the context of this class, but in the context of the other classes you’re taking about the ways in which the material to which you’re being exposed sheds light through multiple disciplinary perspectives on the set of questions that we’re concerned with.Chapter 2. First Example of Course Topics: the Ring of Gyges So that’s the opening segment of the lecture. That what I had called the “overview and course topics” section of the class. And what I want to do now is to give you three examples of the kinds of topics that we’ll be addressing this semester.So the first example I’m going to give is actually drawn from the readings that we’ll be doing for Thursday. And it’s a story from Plato’s Republic called the story of the ring of Gyges.I’ll give you a little bit more background on Thursday about where this story fits in the context of the book from which it’s drawn, but for now, all you need to know is that there’s a character named Glaucon who’s actually one of the brothers of Plato, the author of this dialogue. And Glaucon is in conversation with the great ancient Greek philosopher Socrates, and he’s trying to convince Socrates that when people act morally, the only reason they do it is because they can’t get away with it.So even if you’ve shopped only for today, you’ll have a chance to hear some Plato. So I’m going to read aloud to you these numbers on the right. I’ll explain to you next class, they’re called Stephanus numbers. They enable you, whichever translation of Plato you’re using to find the same passage. And what I’m reading to you from is from Stephanus pages 359 to 360. So: ”There was once a shepherd named Gyges in the service of the ruler of Lydia. There was a giant thunderstorm, and an earthquake broke open the ground and created a chasm at the place where he was tending his sheep. Seeing this, he was filled with amazement and went down into it. And there he saw a hollow bronze horse. There were window-like openings in it, and peeking in, he saw a corpse wearing nothing but a gold ring on his finger. So he took the ring and came out of the chasm.”“He wore the ring at his usual monthly meeting that reported to the king on the state of the flocks. And as he was sitting among the others, he happened to turn the setting of the ring towards himself, to the inside of the hand. And when he did this, he became invisible to those sitting near him, and they went on talking as if he had gone. He wondered about this, and fingering the ring, he turned the setting outwards again, and became visible. So he experimented with the ring to test whether it indeed had this power, and it did. If he turned the setting inward, he became invisible, and if he turned it outward, he became visible again.”“When he realized this, he arranged to become one of the messengers sent to report to the king. And when he arrived there, he seduced the king’s wife, with her help, attacked and killed the king, and took over the kingdom.”So that’s the story of the ring of Gyges. Now why is it that Glaucon tells that story? Glaucon tells that story with the expectation that you, upon hearing this, will think that you would act as Gyges did, if you had the opportunity to get away with crime without being caught.Glaucon’s conclusion from this story is that those who practice justice, those who act in conformity with the moral code of their society, do so because they lack the power to do injustice. They act in that way because they fear the punishment of society. They don’t act in that way because it’s in any way valuable to them.And the reading that we’re going to do for this Thursday’s class includes  the text that surrounds the story that I just told you. So the setup wherein Glaucon raises the challenge of which  is supposed to be an example, and the conversation between Glaucon and Socrates that follows the posing of the challenge through this story. And in addition, we’re going to read some empirical psychological work on the question of what people do when they think they are unobserved.So we’re going to ask the question whether, as a matter of fact, people would, and whether, as a matter of fact, people should behave as Gyges did. That’s the first example of the kind of topic we’re going to address in the course.Chapter 3. Second Example of Course Topics: Trolley problems A second set of topics that we’ll address in the course will take off from a particular philosophical example that has become quite popular in contemporary discussions of morality, but which is actually traceable, about 40 years old, to some writings by Philippa Foot, and the philosopher Judith Thomson. And the case, with which I suspect some of you are familiar, involves a trolley, which is hurtling down the track in the direction of five people, and if the trolley is not turned, it will hit this group of five.Now, the question that philosophers like to pose is the following. Suppose that there were a switch, which you could use that would divert the trolley so that instead of hitting the five people, it would go down a branch track and hit one. When we have our course clickers, we’ll be able to do this scientifically. For now, I just want a show of hands. How many people think it is either morally permitted or morally required, that is, either permitted or required, not forbidden, to switch the trolley in such a way that it hits the one person, rather than the five? How many think it’s either permitted or required to switch the trolley so that one person dies rather than five?  OK. And how many of you think it’s morally forbidden to turn the trolley so that it kills one person rather than five? How many of you think it’s morally forbidden, prohibited?  OK. So as I said, we don’t have the clickers, but a vast majority of the class believes that it’s either permitted or required to divert the trolley.Now, suppose we had a slightly different situation. Instead of the one person being on the tracks, there is, rather, a bridge that rests over the trolley tracks. And atop the bridge, a large gentleman of ample girth such that were you to dislodge him from his present location using the same switch that you used in the last case, he would be sufficiently weighty to prevent the trolley from hitting the five.How many of you think it is morally required or morally permitted to push the fat man off the bridge to prevent the trolley from hitting the five?  And how many of you think it is morally prohibited? Hands up again?  All right. We have a very, very different spread this time.Now suppose we end up at the hospital, and the five who were lying on the track when the trolley didn’t hit them are terribly injured in such a way that one needs a heart, one needs a lung, one needs a leg, one needs an arm, one needs an eye. And in walks a healthy gentleman with exactly the organs required to save the five. How many of you think it is morally required or morally permitted to cut up the one to save the five?  I won’t sit with you in the hospital waiting room. That was three hands. How many of you think it is morally prohibited?  All right.Suppose there is a bear running towards you. You’re standing in line of people, and there’s a bear running towards you. How many of you think it’s morally permitted to move out of the bear’s way if the bear is running towards you?  OK. Now when that happens, the bear’s going to eat the guy who is right behind you. OK. Case number two: Suppose there’s a bear running towards you. How many of you think it’s morally permitted to reach behind you, and take that guy and put him in front of you to shield you from the bear?  Very different distribution of hands.OK. What’s going on here? In the original switch case where we turn the trolley, one person’s going to die if we turn the trolley, and five are going to live. In the push the fat man case, if we push the fat man, one person’s going to die, and five people are going to live. In the patient in the hospital case, we bring him into the hospital and cut him up. One person’s going to die, and five people are going to live. In the bear case, when you duck, and he gets the guy behind you, the guy behind you dies, and you live. In the bear case, where you take the guy behind you, put him in front of you, and use him as a shield, the guy behind you dies and you live.So the second set of topics that I want to let you know we’ll be talking about is the following: What is it that explains the differences in our reactions to these cases? Is there genuinely a morally relevant difference between diverting the trolley so that it kills the one rather than the five, and pushing the fat man, so the trolley kills the one rather than the five? Or is the difference in our reaction to those two cases merely psychological? Is there really a moral difference between ducking in such a way that a harm that was heading towards you hit somebody else instead, and shields you, so that a harm that is heading towards you is visited upon someone else instead? What is it that explains the differences in our reactions in these cases? What moral implications does that have, and what psychological implications does that have? So that’s the second set of examples that I want to give you, a topic that we’ll be addressing.Chapter 4. Third Example of Course Topics: Procrastination Third set of examples. I imagine some of you are familiar with the following situation. You go to the library intending sincerely to read the Plato that has been assigned to you for the next lecture, and you find yourself, instead, answering e-mails. Or you set for yourself a dietary regimen, according to which you will eat large amounts of fruit and vegetables, and instead you find yourself tempted by cake. Or you commit yourself to saving up money for some sort of long-term goal, and instead, find yourself distracted by the prospects of March break in Jamaica with your roommate, or an iPod touch, or a new PlayStation 2 device that you can use to distract yourself from your reading. So what is it about human beings that we can form these sorts of plans, and then not act on them? And what is it that we can do to make ourselves stick to commitments that we’ve made in moments of reflection?So the reading that I assigned to you for today is a very, very brief chapter from Dan Ariely’s popular book. It’s a chapter on procrastination. And in it, he describes a number of strategies that we can use to help ourselves stick to long-term commitments.So, for example, one of the things that people do if they want to get themselves to read is that they go to the library, and they surround themselves by other people who are reading. If you are in a social setting where other people are conforming to a standard that you had set for yourself to conform to, you may find yourself conforming to that standard, and not doing that which you will ultimately regret. If you find yourself incredibly tempted by food that you have prohibited to yourself, it may be helpful to limit your access to it.In the chapter that we read, Dan Ariely describes an example of what he called the iced credit card solution, where, if you have a tendency to make impulse purchases on the Internet, you take your credit card, and you put it in a glass of water, which you put into the freezer. And then, if you want to buy something, you remove the credit card from the freezer, and if, when the water has melted, you still want to buy it, then go ahead. So restricting our immediate access to items that are tempting is a way of getting around the problem.A third way of getting around these sorts of problems involves automatizing the behavior that you wish to encourage. So if I set up a system on my credit card where every time I spend $10 an additional $10 goes into my savings account, it will turn out that rather than spending my money on that which I will buy, I will save the money for that to which I am committed.So the philosophical and psychological question that this part of the course raises is the following: What sort of beings are there that are capable, simultaneously, of planning reflectively and of not acting on the basis of their plan? It looks an awful lot like exactly the sort of people that we were getting information about in our previous two examples. They’re the kind of beings who have a reflective self, which is capable of reason and commitment, and also aspects of their selves that respond non-reflectively to features in the environment.So given that, what sorts of strategies are available to help these kinds of beings stick to their reflectively endorsed plans? The basic answer is that there are two kinds of strategies. One kind of strategy involves increasing the relative utility of the reflective commitment, that is, making it more salient to you in whatever kind of way. That reading and broccoli and piggy banks are valuable. And the other sort of strategy involves reducing the appeal of the temporarily tempting strategy: reducing access to e-mail, reducing access to the food, making it harder to take the trip.So one of the things that we’ll talk about in the context of the course, both in small ways and in large ways, is this fulcrum point of procrastination as a way of understanding a large number of social structures: laws, moral codes, punishments, strategies for self-regulation. All of these are aspects of society that play off of the two fundamental strategies just described. They play off of how it is that either we make certain things that we reflectively endorse more valuable, or how we make certain things that we wish not to pursue less acceptable. So that’s the third example of the kind of topic that we’ll be talking about this semester.Chapter 5. What is Distinctive About this Course So what I want to do in the final few minutes of the course is to say a little bit about some distinctive features of the class. So the first thing, as some of you may have noticed, is that very inconspicuously, in the back of our room, is a videographer. And the videographer in the back of our room is here because this class is being videotaped for the Open Yale Courses network. That means that there is a chance that your voice will be captured on audiotape. And if that happens, we’ll need to obtain your permission to reproduce your voice on the iTunes University version of this class. But it’s also your chance for fame and fortune, dudes.It’s my hope that the fact that this course is with Open Yale Courses will be as unobtrusive as possible, but if any of you have any concerns about it, please feel free to be in touch.The second, and I think more important thing, that’s distinctive about this course, is that this course is, in some ways, about itself. The pedagogical features of this course are designed with the fundamental insight that underlies all of the readings in mind. What I am assuming is that on reflection, all of you are committed to reading, and learning, and engaging with the material. And my goal is to make that as easy, and exciting, and interesting for you as possible.So as you’ve noticed from the syllabus, those of you who have had a chance to look at it, there are almost weekly assignments in this class. But the weekly assignments are designed to make you want to engage with the material. So, for example, the very first assignment for this course, which is described on the back page of the blue handout, asks you to think about whether you want to commit yourself, voluntarily, to not having Internet access during this class, and then to explain your decision, making reference to the work on procrastination that we read for this week.Throughout the semester, my goal will be to make exercises that engage you in that way. One of the exercises involves writing a review of a short story that we read from the perspective of one of the two philosophers that we’ve read. One of the assignments involves designing a week of a future version of this course. So though there are ten weekly assignments, it’s my hope that engaging in those assignments will keep you connected to the course. In fact, a number of the readings on the syllabus that appears before you were suggestions made by students who took the seminar version of this course in previous years.In addition, as you saw from the trolley cases, I’m going to be asking you, in the context of class, to think about cases and examples. And in doing that, it’s been found that making use of clickers is enormously helpful to keep students engaged. So you’ll notice that the second part of next week’s assignment asks you, if you’re enrolled in the course for credit, to pick up a clicker at the Bass Library, and to register its number on the course website. So once the course gets going, starting in the middle of the second week, we’ll be making use of clickers.Finally, one of the things that makes this course distinctive is that I actually spent last year, as the Yale Daily News reports, as a full-time student. I had a grant from the Mellon Foundation that allowed me to take classes, and so I spent most of last year sitting in the back row of classrooms like this one, listening to lectures like this one. Which is how I got the idea about the turning off the Internet thing. Ahem.But it also helped me realize that the rhythm of the semester is a complicated one. So as you’ll see, the second sentence of the Yale Daily News article notes, “Her grades lately have been sliding a little–from an ‘excellent’ on the first two assignments to only a ‘checkmark’ for completion on the most recent two.”I promise I will not post your grades in the Yale Daily News. But I promise that I am, as a result of that experience, profoundly aware of the ways in which structuring assignments with enough advance notice is crucial for allowing students to succeed in the class.So I’ve tried to be incredibly explicit on the syllabus. And if you look at pages four and five of the syllabus, you’ll see that there are five kinds of requirements for the course. The first and perhaps the most important requirement of the course are the set of readings that I have assigned you. And these readings come in two forms. Roughly half of them come from the six books which I have ordered on your behalf from Labyrinth Books. All of the books are low-priced student editions. All of them are easily available in used form. And together, even purchased new at full price, they add up to $80.So some of the assignments come either from the three classical works that we’ll be reading, Plato, Aristotle, and Epictetus, the two contemporary works that we’re looking at, Jonathan Haidt’s Happiness Hypothesis, and a book by Jonathan Shea called Achilles in Vietnam, and finally, I’ve asked you to purchase a small $15 philosophy dictionary, which is enormously useful for looking up terms and concepts with which you might be unfamiliar.I realize, however, that some of you aren’t going to have decided whether you’re taking the course before this Thursday. And so even though half of Thursday’s reading comes from this book, I have put up the relevant pages on our Classes*v2 server. So you can do the reading for Thursday, even if you haven’t purchased the book. So roughly half the readings come from those books. Roughly half the readings come from articles, and all of those readings are available on the *v2 server for next class.But in addition to choosing books that I think are acceptable and interesting, I’ve also made an effort to provide you with reading guides to the books in a way that will orient you in them. So if you look at the first three pages of the blue handout, you will see an example of a reading guide, and not just an example of a reading guide, it’s the reading guide for the reading on Thursday.And you’ll see that it does three things. The first thing that it does, is it gives you a bit of background about the author that we’re reading, and the text from which we’re doing the reading. The second thing that it does, is that it highlights the terms and concepts which I’m hoping that you will get out of the material. Notions and terms that will enable you to express thoughts that you might have had, and the vocabulary that will let you be in conversation with others.And the final thing that the reading guide has are a set of questions to focus your attention as you do the reading. There’s no requirement that you write out answers to these. You can use them to make notes for yourselves; you can use them in conversation with your classmates. But you will have, for every one of the required readings, this amount of guidance, and for each of the recommended and optional readings, information about the author.Second important thing about the course is lecture and sections. I really like seeing all these faces, and I really would love to see them all semester long. I promise to give you at least one fun slide, and probably more, per lecture. So I really hope you’ll come , ‘cause when I post the slides , you can’t see the animation of the nice shepherd. So I will try to make lectures as engaging as possible, and likewise with sections. We will make an effort to make these settings where you can genuinely engage with the material and with one another.It has been pointed out to me that one of the section times available is Thursdays from 10:30 to 11:20, which is, of course, when the lecture meets. Obviously that’s a typographical error, and we’ll be adding additional section times to make up for that. Section registration happens in the usual way.There will, in addition, be ten brief directed exercises. I’ve already said a bit to you about them, and there’s information on the syllabus about what point values those have in determining your final grades. There are two short essays. There will be three assigned, and you can choose which two of those you like. And finally, there will be a final exam where, in keeping with the theory of the course, I will distribute every single one of the questions that may appear on the exam in advance. I will encourage you to learn that material in a focused and structured way. And the exam will consist of a proper subset of those questions, which you have been given to prepare in advance.So that’s an overview of what I plan to do this semester, first of what kind of course this is, second, three examples of topics that we’re going to address, third, some of the things that are distinctive about the course and some of its requirements. So what questions do you have? Yeah?Student: Professor Tamar Gendler: So the question is, are the videos for the lectures going to be posted? And the answer is, the videos for the lectures take time to be edited and processed, so they will be posted, but they won’t be posted during the class. I will post the slides after each lecture, but as you saw today, the slides don’t give you that much information. Yes?Student: Professor Tamar Gendler: No. Everything in the course is done electronically; so all assignments for the course are to be submitted on the Classes*v2 server under assignments. And the deadline for the first written exercise is actually next Tuesday at 10 AM, but because that’s still during shopping period, that exercise will be accepted without penalty until Friday. But everything for the class, in terms of submission and return of exercises, will be done online on our v2 site. Yeah?Student: When are sections going to start?Professor Tamar Gendler: When are sections going to start? Sections will begin the third week of the semester. Yeah?Student: Professor Tamar Gendler: Yes. So if you look at the sample directed exercise which I gave you, which is on the back side of the blue sheet. So the question is, it says that directed exercises are 1% to 7% each; will I tell you how much a directed exercise is worth? Answer, yes. So if you turn over the blue sheet on the back, you’ll see that the directed exercise for next week has two parts. One, take out a clicker; that’s worth one point. Two, tell me whether you’re going to turn off your Internet and why. Briefly. So the directed exercise will always say: here’s the question, here’s the point value for the question. Anything else?We’re actually at the end of time! So you all have paced your questions extraordinarily well, and I look forward to seeing you next class.Professor Shelly Kagan: All right, so this is Philosophy 176. The class is on death. My name is Shelly Kagan. The very first thing I want to do is to invite you to call me Shelly. That is, if we meet on the street, you come talk to me during office hours, you ask some question; Shelly’s the name that I respond to. I will, eventually, respond to Professor Kagan, but the synapses take a bit longer for that. It’s not the name I immediately recognize. I have found that over the years, fewer and fewer students feel comfortable calling me Shelly. When I was young, it seemed to work. Now I’m gray and august. But if you’re comfortable with it, it’s the name that I prefer to be called by.Now, as I say, this is a class on death. But it’s a philosophy class, and what that means is that the set of topics that we’re going to be talking about in this class are not identical to the topics that other classes on death might try to cover. So the first thing I want to do is say something about the things we won’t be talking about that you might reasonably expect or hope that a class on death would talk about, so that if this is not the class you were looking for, you still have time to go check out some other class.So here are some things that a class on death could cover that we won’t talk about. What I primarily have in mind are sort of psychological and sociological questions about the nature of death, or the phenomenon of death. So, a class on death might well have a discussion of the process of dying and coming to reconcile yourself with the fact that you’re going to die. Some of you may know about Elisabeth Kübler-Ross’s discussion of the so-called five stages of dying. There’s denial, and then there’s anger, and then there’s bargaining. I actually don’t remember the five stages. We’re not going to talk about that. Similarly, we’re not going to talk about the funeral industry in America and how it rips off people, which it does, in their moments of grief and weakness and overcharges them for the various things that it offers. We’re not going to talk about that. We’re not going to talk about the process of grieving or bereavement. We’re not going to talk about sociological attitudes that we have towards the dying in our culture and how we tend to try to keep the dying hidden from the rest of us. These are all perfectly important topics, but they’re not, as I say, topics that we’re going to be talking about in this class.So what will we talk about? Well, the things we’ll talk about are philosophical questions that arise as we begin to think about the nature of death. Like this. In broad scope, the first half of the class is going to be metaphysics, for those of you who are familiar with the philosophical piece of jargon. And roughly, the second half of the class is going to be value theory.So, the first half of the class is going to be concerned with questions about the nature of death. What happens when we die? Indeed, to get at that question, the first thing we’re going to have to think about is what are we? What kind of an entity is a person? In particular, do we have souls, and for this class when I talk about a soul, what I’m going to mean is sort of a bit of philosophical jargon. I’m going to mean something immaterial, something distinct from our bodies. Do we have immaterial souls, something that might survive the death of our body? And if not, what does that imply about the nature of death? What kind of an event is death? What is it for me to survive? What would it mean for me to survive my death? What does it mean for me to survive tonight? That is, you know, somebody’s going to be here lecturing to the class on Thursday, presumably that will be me. What is it for that person who’s there on Thursday to be the same person as the person who’s sitting here lecturing to you today? These are questions about the nature of personal identity. Pretty clearly, to think about death and continued existence and survival, we have to get clear about the nature of personal identity. These sorts of questions will occupy us for roughly the first half of the semester.And then we’ll turn to value questions. If death is the end, is death bad? Now, of course, most of us are immediately and strongly inclined to think that death is bad. But there are a set of philosophical puzzles about how death could be bad. To sort of give you a quick taste, if after my death I won’t exist, how could anything be bad for me? How could anything be bad for something that doesn’t exist? So how could death be bad? So it’s not that the result is going to be that I’m going to try to convince you that death isn’t bad, but it takes actually a little bit of work to pin down precisely what is it about death that’s bad and how can it be death? Is there more than one thing about death that makes it bad? We’ll turn to questions like that. If death is bad, then one might wonder would immortality be a good thing? That’s a question that we’ll think about. Or, more generally, we’ll worry about how should the fact that I’m going to die affect the way I live? What should my attitude be towards my mortality? Should I be afraid of death, for example? Should I despair at the fact that I’m going to die?Finally, we’ll turn to questions about suicide. Many of us think that given the valuable and precious thing that life is, suicide makes no sense. You’re throwing away the only life you’re ever going to have. And so we’ll end the semester by thinking about questions along the lines of the rationality and morality of suicide. So roughly speaking, that’s where we’re going. First half of the class, metaphysics; second half of the class, value theory.Next thing I need to explain is this. There’s, roughly speaking, two ways to do a class, especially an introductory class like this. In approach number one, you simply lay out the various positions, pro and con, and the professor strives to remain neutral; sort of not tip his hand about what he holds. That’s approach number one. And sometimes in my intro classes that’s the approach that I take. But the other approach, and the one that I should warn you I’m going to take this semester, in this class, is rather different. There’s a line that I’m going to be developing, pushing, if you will, or defending in this class. That is to say, there’s a certain set of views I hold about the issues that we’ll be discussing. And what I’m going to try to do in this class is argue for those views. Try to convince you that those views are correct.To help you know sort of ahead of time quickly what those views are, I want to start by describing a set of views that many of you probably believe. So I’m going to give you a cluster of views. Logically speaking, you could believe some of these things and not all of them. But here’s a set of views that many of you probably believe, and I imagine most of you believe at least some of these things.So here’s the set of common views. First of all, that we have a soul. That is to say we are not just bodies. We’re not just lumps of bone and flesh. But there’s a part of us, perhaps the essential part of us, that is something more than the physical, the spiritual, immaterial part of us, which as I say in this class we’ll call a soul. Most of us, most of you, probably believe in souls. Certainly most people in America believe in some sort of immaterial soul. And given this existence of this immaterial soul, it’s a possibility, indeed a fair likelihood, that we will survive our deaths. The death will be the destruction of my body, but my soul is immaterial and so my soul can continue to exist after my death. And whether or not you actually believe in a soul, you hope that there’s a soul so that there’ll be this serious possibility of surviving your death because death is not only bad, but so horrible that what we would like to have happen is, we would like to live forever. And so, armed with a soul, as it were, there’s at least the possibility of immortality. Immortality would be wonderful. That’s what we hope is the case, whether or not we know that it’s the case. Immortality would be wonderful. That’s why death’s so bad. It robs us of immortality. And if there is no soul, if death is the end, if there is no immortality, this is such an overwhelmingly bad thing that the only, the obvious reaction, the natural reaction, the universal reaction, is to face the prospect of death with fear and despair. And as I mentioned earlier then, death is so horrible and life is so wonderful that it could never make sense to throw it away. So suicide is both immoral on the one hand and never makes sense. It’s always irrational as well, in addition.That, as I say, is I think a common set of views about the nature of death. And what I’m going to be doing, what I’m going to be arguing in this class, is that that set of views is pretty much mistaken from beginning to end. And so I’m going to try to convince you that there is no soul. Immortality would not be a good thing. Fear of death isn’t actually an appropriate response to death. Suicide, under certain circumstances, might be rationally and morally justified. As I say, the common picture is pretty much mistaken from start to end. That’s at least my goal. That’s my aim. That’s what I’m going to be doing. Now, since of course, I believe the views I believe — and I hope at the end of the semester you’ll agree with me, because I think they’re true and I hope you’ll end up believing the truth . But I should say that the crucial point isn’t for you to agree with me. The crucial point is for you to think for yourself. And so what I’m really doing is inviting you to take a good, cold, hard look at death, and to face it and think about it in a way that most of us don’t do. If you, at the end of the semester, haven’t agreed with me about this particular claim or that particular claim, so be it. I’ll be content — I won’t be completely content — but I’ll be at least largely content as long as you’ve really thought through the arguments on each side of these various issues.Karen, maybe this would be a good time for you to pass around the syllabus.Next introductory remark: A lot of today’s talk is going to be devoted to business. I’ll get to, if time permits, some philosophy at the end. I want to make one more remark about what I’ll be doing in terms of this class. This class, as I say, is a philosophy class. We’ll basically be sitting here thinking about what we can know or make sense of with regard to death using our reasoning capacity. We’ll be trying to think about death from a rational standpoint.One kind of evidence or one kind of argument that we won’t be making use of here is appeal to religious authority. So some of you may believe in, for example, the existence of an afterlife. You may believe you’re going to survive your death. You may believe in immortality because that’s what your church teaches you. And that’s fine. It’s not my purpose or intention here to try to argue you out of your religious beliefs or to argue against your religious beliefs. All I’m going to ask is that we not appeal to such religious arguments, appeal to revelation or the authority of the Bible, or what have you, in the course of this argument. In the course of this class.If you want to, you could think of this class as one big hypothetical. What conclusions would we come to about the nature of death if we had to think about it from a secular perspective? Making use of only our own reasoning, as opposed to whatever answers we might be given by divine revealed authority. Those of you who believe in divine revealed authority, that’s a debate for another day. It’s not a debate that we’re going to be engaged in here in this semester. Similarly, although I’m not going to ask you in your discussion sections to hide your religious views, you’ll be asked in the course of defending them, to give reasons that would make sense to all of us.That’s by way of sort of where the class is going. Let me now turn to some discussion about the requirements of the class, grades and so forth and so on. The syllabus is going around the class. Almost all of you have it at this point. The syllabus doesn’t really say a whole lot. I’ve already given you an overview of what topics we’ll be going to. The crucial point about the syllabus is that it indicates what reading you need to have done for any given week. Now, I’ve done my best to peg the readings to where I will be on that week’s lecture, but I don’t lecture with lecture notes, for the most part. Sometimes I take a little bit longer than I anticipated. Actually, I often take a little bit longer than I anticipated. No doubt at some point I’ll fall behind. At some point I may rush to catch up ahead. It won’t always be the case that the readings will exactly coincide with where the lectures are at. Nonetheless, in any given week, for the start of that week, you should have done the readings that are listed for that week. The readings on the syllabus simply say the author, and there are a couple of books that are available at the bookstore. There are a larger packet of readings that’s available as a course pack at Tyco’s . And so for any given week you can find the reading. One or two cases, maybe just one actually, where I’ve got more than one article by the given author, I’ve given the title of the article as well. It shouldn’t be difficult to locate the reading for any given week.The format of the class, of course, is a familiar and straightforward one. I’ll be sitting here lecturing twice a week, this time, 10:30 to 11:20. Once a week you will break up into discussion sections. The discussion sections will meet for 50 minutes. Each one of you will have a single time. But it’ll be different times the discussion sections meet. For the first time, the philosophy department has just switched over to the online discussion section registration system. I’m not 100% certain how that works. I’ve not used it before. I take it the idea is something like this. Right now, if you were to shop the class, you could find the tentative list of discussion section days and times. So be sure to find some time that works for you. You can’t actually register for any of those discussion section times yet. But as of, I think, next week when you’re able to begin your online registration, you will be able to register for any discussion section that still has a slot, still has a space open in it. In fact, you won’t be able to finalize your registration for your courses until you’ve actually signed up for an available slot. Once you have registered, if some other slots become available that weren’t previously available, I gather you’ll be sent some sort of email by the system, in case some other time would be better for you. You can put yourself on waiting lists and so forth. It sounds pretty good on paper. Maybe it’ll all work smoothly. I’ve never been through it before. I hope we won’t have any problems. Right now what you want to make sure is that there is a time that’s available — right now all the times are available — but that there is a time that works for you. Because if you can’t find a discussion section that works for you, you won’t be able to take this course. Any questions about that?I should actually ask, any questions about anything that I’ve asked or said so far, up to this point? Let me make a remark about questions, which is — today’s mostly business. Hopefully, it’ll be fairly straightforward. But both today and throughout the entire semester, as I’m lecturing I want to invite you to jump in with questions. Well, jump in is a bit of an exaggeration. I don’t want you to just start talking, but raise your hand. If I’m saying something that you don’t understand, the chances are pretty good that there’s 25 or 50 other students in the class who don’t understand it either. I’m just not being clear. So I want to welcome you, I really want to invite you, whenever you’ve got some reactions to the things that I’m saying, raise your hand, I’ll call on you. Say, “Shelly, I didn’t really understand what you were saying about the soul. Could you please explain that again?” Or, for that matter, if you’ve got some quick reactions or thoughts or responses to the arguments that I’m laying out and you want to share them with the class as a whole, then very much I want to invite you to do this. Now this class is too big for us to have some close, intimate conversation between the 150-180, however many students there are here. That’s not going to happen. But the chance for detailed discussion in the discussion section, that’s where that should happen. But still, there is the chance for brief reactions and definitely a chance for questions. I very much want to invite you to do that. So, if at any point you’ve got something you want to ask about or some two bits you want to add, raise your hand, wiggle it around, make sure I see you. I may want to finish the particular point that I’m making, but I’ll try to come back to you and I’ll then raise your question. And if I remember at least, I will repeat the question out loud so that everybody can hear it.I also want to say that I will try to have the practice of, after class ends, if you want to continue the discussion, you have some questions that occurred to you towards the end, we didn’t have a chance to share them with the class as a whole, I will, on a normal day, meet outside and continue to talk with however many of you want to do that until you’re done. I just love talking about this stuff and I welcome you to come to my office hours. I invite you to ask questions in class or, if you prefer, after class as well. Again, any questions about any of that? Yeah.Student: Professor Shelly Kagan: When are my office hours? That’s a great question and I don’t know the answer to it. I haven’t planned them yet. On Thursday, start the class by asking me that and I’ll give you an answer. All right.Other bits of business. I should say something about grades. Now many of you may have heard, many of you may know, and if you don’t already know this, I should warn you, that I have a reputation around Yale as being a harsh grader. I know this is true, that is, I know I have the reputation, both because I periodically in my student evaluations get told I’m one of Yale’s harsher graders, and because every now and then the Yale Daily News will have an article about grade inflation and they’ll always ask me, “Well Professor Kagan is somebody…” Once there was a story on grade inflation that the Yale Daily News began by saying, “As Shelly Kagan (known at Yale as one of the hardest graders).” So I know I’ve got at least the reputation of being a hard grader. I don’t actually know whether it’s deserved or not, because Yale does not publish information about what the grading averages are. At other schools I’ve taught at there’s been information along the lines of well the typical grade in an introductory course in the humanities is such and such. Shortly after I came here to Yale, and I started realizing that people thought I was a harder grader than most other Yale professors, I called the administration and asked, “Do you have this sort of information?” The answer is “Yes.” “Will you give it to me?” The answer was “No.” They don’t share this information with the Yale faculty. Seems odd. The explanation, of course, actually isn’t that hard to come by. The worry is that those of us who are harder graders than average, if the information were published, would feel guilty and sort of ease up on our grading. But those who are easier graders than average will never feel guilty and toughen up. So the result would be a constant push up with the grades. At any rate, I don’t know for certainty that I’m a harder grader, but I believe that it’s the case based on reactions I get when I give the speech that I’m about to give.Okay, so . When I open the blue book, the Yale guideline, the Yale catalog, it’s got a page, as you all know, where it says what letter grades mean at Yale. I didn’t actually bring it this year. Sometimes I do, but I’ve got it pretty much memorized. It says, for example, next to each letter grade what it means. B, for example, means good. A means excellent, C means satisfactory, D is passing, F is failing. B, let’s start with B. B means good. Now the crucial question then is what does good mean? I take good to mean good. Consequently,  if you were to write a good paper for me, that would get a B. And when you get a B from me — now, I say me, this is the royal me. Because I won’t actually be grading your papers. Your papers will be graded by a small army of TAs. But they will grade under my supervision, and in keeping with the standards that I ask them to grade with. So when you’re pissed off about your grade, the person to take it up with — well, take it up with them. But eventually you’ll want to take it up with me. So when you get a B from us, B doesn’t mean what a piece of crap. B means good job! And so you should be pleased to get a B, because it meant you were doing good work and it’s not easy to do good work in philosophy.A means excellent. Now excellent does not mean publishable. Excellent does not mean you are God’s gift to philosophy . So it’s crucial to understand it doesn’t mean that the only way you’re going to get an A is to be God’s gift to philosophy. A means excellent work for a first class in philosophy. This is an introductory class. It does not presuppose any background in philosophy. Still, to get an A, you’ve got to show some flair for the subject. You’ve got to show not only have you understood the ideas that have been put forward in the readings and in the lectures and so forth, but you see how to sort of put them together in the paper in a way that shows you’ve got some aptitude here. You did it in a way that made us take note. That’s what we try to reserve As for. Some of you will end up getting As, if not at the beginning, by the end of the semester. Many of you will end up getting Bs, if not at the beginning, by the end of the semester. Many of you will not start out doing good work. Many of you will start out doing satisfactory work or, truth be told, less than satisfactory work.Now look, I was an undergraduate once. And I know what it is to write a typical undergraduate paper. You sit down the night before and you had a couple of ideas. You thought about it maybe for a half an hour. And you meant to get to it sooner, but you had a lot of other things to do. And you throw it off in a couple of hours and maybe stay up late. You know it’s not the worst thing you ever wrote, and it’s not the best thing you ever wrote, and it has a couple of nice ideas, but maybe it could be better. It’s sort of a satisfactory job. Yale says satisfactory means C. So many of you will start off the semester writing that kind of paper.And the fact of the matter is, some of you will start off writing worse papers than that. Because writing a philosophy paper is a difficult thing to learn how to do. It’s exercising a set of muscles that a lot of you have not spent a lot of time exercising. Now it’s not as though you haven’t spent any time doing it. You’ve had bull sessions, right, with your high school friends or in your college dorm or what have you. But you haven’t done it with the kind of discipline and rigor that we’re looking for here. So, like anything else, it’s a skill that gets better with practice. And what that means, of course, is you won’t do as well at the beginning as you’re likely to be doing toward the end. Some of you, unfortunately, won’t do very good jobs at the beginning — and my TAs, I’ll encourage them to be prepared to give Ds. If the vices of the paper significantly outweigh the virtues, that’s a D. If the vices very significantly outweigh whatever virtues there are, that’s some kind of an F. So the fact of the matter is many of you in your initial papers will get lower grades than you’ve probably ever gotten before in your life. I wanted to warn you about that.Now I say this not so much to depress the hell out of you, but (a) partly to warn you, and (b) to make it clear that I believe that it’s a skill. Writing a good philosophy paper is a skill and you can get better at it. Consequently, most of you will get better at it. So let me make the following remark. Officially, each paper — you have three five-page papers. Each paper is worth 25% of your grade, officially. But — the remaining 25% is discussion section; I’ll get to that in a minute — officially, 25% of your grade is for each of the three papers. But if, over the course of the semester, you get better, then we will give, at the end of the semester, when we’re figuring out your semester grade, we’ll give the later, stronger papers more than their official weight. For many of you, the first paper will be clearly the worst paper you write. And then we’ll just throw that grade away; give greater weight to the second and third papers. If the third paper is the strongest, we will give even more weight to the third paper. There’s no formula here, a great deal depends on the overall pattern, what your TA tells me about how you’ve done over the course of the semester. But this policy of giving greater weight, if you show improvement, is something that most of you will benefit from. So if you end up not doing well, the moral of the story is not to go running off and dropping the class, but to figure out what you did right, what you didn’t do right, how to make the second paper better and the third paper stronger, again. And if you do show improvement, that will very significantly influence and emerge in terms of the impact it has on your overall semester grade. Because of this policy, I don’t actually know when all is said and done whether at the end of the semester I’m any harder, whether I depart from the average or not.Let me quickly mention there’s a fairly typical grade distribution for the overall grades of this, at the end of the semester. Roughly 25% of you are likely to end up with some kind of an A at the end of the semester. Fifty, 55% of you or so are likely to end up with some kind of a B. Twenty, 25% percent of you might end up with some sort of a C. Sometimes there’s a couple of percent that end up worse than that. Unsurprisingly, you’ve got the ability to do decent work in this class and most of you have the ability to do good work, and some of you have, a fair chunk of you have, the ability to do excellent work, though it may take some work on your part to get to that point.The last thing I should say about the grades is why do I do this? It’s really I try to do it as a sign of respect for you. I know that may seem like a surprising thing to say when I’ve just sort of gone on my little gleeful amount about how I’m going to fail all of you , but it’s worth my saying you guys are so smart. You’re so talented. You’ve gotten so far on your ability that many of you have learned to coast. It’s not doing you any kind of service to let you continue coasting. My goal here is to be honest with you, right? Look, you’re smart enough probably most of you to pull off some sort of B without breaking into a sweat, or at least not a significant sweat. So be it. But it’s just lying to you to pretend that that’s excellence in philosophy. So what I want to do in this class is be honest with you and tell you, “You’ve really done work here to be extraordinarily proud of yourself” versus “Yeah, you’ve done something okay” or “You’ve done good work. Admittedly, it’s not great, but you’ve done good work.” All right, that’s 75% of your grade is the papers.The remaining 25% of your grade is based on discussion section. Now that’s a lot of your grade to turn on discussion section. So the first thing I need to tell you is I really mean it. If you blow off discussion section, you’re grade will suffer. So it’s worth knowing in a general way what you need to do to earn a good grade in discussion section and here the answer is, perhaps the obvious one, you need to participate. You need to come to discussion sections having thought about the lectures, having done the readings, having thought about the questions that they raise, and you need to come to discussion section then prepared to discuss this week’s set of issues. You need to listen to what your classmates are saying and say why you disagree with them. And not just that you disagree with them, but to raise an objection. Or why you agree with them. And when somebody else then attacks them, say, “Look, I think that what John was saying was a good point and here’s how I think he should have defended his position,” or what have you. You need to engage in philosophical discussion. If you’re not participating in discussion section, you’re not doing what the section is there for.Philosophers love to talk and we love to argue. The way to get better at thinking about philosophy is by talking about philosophy. So I’m putting my money where my mouth is. I’m saying, “Look, yeah, that’s an important part of the class. So important that it’s going to be worth 25% of your grade.” Again, it doesn’t mean — this is slightly different from the papers — that you’ve got to be brilliant philosophically to get an A. Rather, you’ve got to be a wonderful class citizen to get an A for discussion section. So, as I put it, in fact I think I put it this way on the syllabus, participation — and here I mean respectful participation, not hogging the limelight — participation can improve your grade, but it won’t lower your grade. Nonparticipation, or not being there, that will lower your participation grade. Any question about any of that?All right. So I’m sorry to have sort of the long gloom and doom, but it seems that it’s only fair to let you know what you’re getting into. One other remark about the discussion sections. The way I think of it is like the conversation hour for your foreign language class. How many of you have had a philosophy class before? Thanks. Maybe 15% of you. Maybe 20% of you. Most of you have not. That’s pretty normal. Don’t go into discussion section thinking, “Oh, I can’t talk. I don’t have any background in philosophy. I’ve never done this sort of thing before.” That’s true for most of you. The way you get better is by talking philosophy.All right. Next remark. I guess this is sort of just one last connection with regard to grades. This is an intro philosophy class. The crucial point about intro is it means first class in philosophy. It doesn’t presuppose any background in philosophy. It doesn’t necessarily mean easy. Some of this material for some of you is going to be very, very difficult. And although the number of pages that you’ll have to read are not — there’s not a lot. Probably in a typical week, 50 pages, maybe less. For many of you, you’re going to find it dense material. And although I don’t really have the fantasy that many of you will read this stuff twice, if you had the time to do it, that would be a wonderful thing to do. Philosophy is hard stuff to read.Other remark about this being an intro class is that it’s introductory in that the issues that we’re talking about are kind of first run through. Every single thing that we discuss here could be pursued at greater depth. So, for example, we’ll spend whatever it is, maybe a week and a half talking about the nature of personal identity, two weeks. But one could easily spend an entire semester thinking about that question alone. So don’t come away thinking that whatever it is that we’ve talked about here in lecture is the last word on the subject. Rather, it’s something more like first words.Actually, one other word about the readings and the lectures. With one exception, I won’t be spending very much time talking about the readings. The exception is Plato, where I’ll lecture, maybe two lectures, trying to reconstruct Plato’s central arguments, at least the arguments relevant to our class. We’ll be reading one of Plato’s dialogues. But for the most part, although I’ll occasionally, periodically refer to the readings, I won’t spend a lot of time talking about the views in the readings. The readings you should think of as complementary to my lectures. The idea is that there’s more to say than what I’ve said. And you’ll find some more of what there is to say in the readings. Or there may be positions that I mention, but I don’t develop, because I’m not perhaps sympathetic to them, and you might find somebody who is sympathetic to them, developing them in the readings. The readings are a crucial component of the class. You won’t get everything you need simply by coming to the lectures. But equally the case, that the views that I’ll be developing in the lectures are, although not necessarily unique to me, aren’t all laid out in the readings. You won’t get everything I’m talking about in the lectures, if all you do is the readings. They’re both parts of the class.All right. I want to end by — I’m not close to ending, but the last thing I’m going to do is read aloud some student evaluations. I have found over the years that some students like me; some students don’t like me. I don’t know how to make this point any clearer than to share with you a sampling of the student evaluations. These are not actually from last spring, but they’re typical enough that I was too lazy to make some new quotes. Quote one. These are actual quotes from former actual students.(1) “The lectures were clear and followed a very logical order.” (2) “I thought the class was not always organized.” (3) “I thought it was a very well organized class.” (4) ”Overall, I was unsatisfied with this course. Few substantive conclusions were reached.” (5) Along the same vein, “I think he should avoid saying at the end of each segment of the class, ‘Ultimately, you’ll have to decide what to think for yourself.’”  I should end the class by saying, “You will believe.” Actually, I started the class by saying that. You will believe what I believe. (6) “It might be improved by presenting other views better and more objectively, since Kagan always ended a particular line of reasoning by defeating the argument if he didn’t agree with it. He could be a bit more unbiased and tolerant of other perspectives.” (7) “Lectures were sometimes repetitive or obvious, but occasionally, they provided new insights.” (8) “I know that some felt the pace of the arguments was a little slow, but I felt that this was generally necessary, not only for the unphilosophy-savvy population, but also to cover all points.” (9) ”Extremely thorough and thoughtful. Receptive to questions. Brilliant.” I like that one . “Often long-winded.” Hmmm. (10) “He does go around and around the same idea a number of times, which does cut down on the notes for the class, but it can get a little boring.” (11) “Though I’ve heard students say he often repeats himself, I think this is a merit in a philosophy course in which arguments and thoughts can quickly become confusing.” (12) “Shelly Kagan is a fabulous, resourceful, utterly convincing lecturer.” (13) “He would work through arguments right in front of — ” I like this one, because this is what I at least aim to be inside my head. Here’s what I’m doing. Thirteen: “He would work through arguments right in front of us, which then helped me work through them on my own.” (14) “Shelly is an incredibly dynamic lecturer.” (15) “He’s just in his own world babbling on and on . I’d zone out with regularity.” (16) “I have to say that Shelly Kagan is probably the best lecturer I had in my four years at Yale.” (17) “He’s the type of teacher you either love or hate.” Now that’s pretty clearly true. I wish there were some easy litmus test that I could just give you so you’d know which of you would be making a mistake taking this class. I don’t know how to give it to you.Next topic, grades. (1) “He tried to intimidate us too much with his promise of impossible grading so that everyone took the class credit/D/fail, when we all probably ended up with As or Bs. His grading was not hard.” (2) “I recommend it, but only credit/D/fail. Professor Kagan is harsh with grading.” (3) “When Shelly says he’s the harshest grader on campus, he isn’t lying. I was consistently surprised by how poorly I did on papers . The standards in this class are just different from all other classes.” (4) ”Kagan’s reputation as a harsh grader is unfounded. If you put in the effort, the grade will reflect that.” So that settles the question am I a harsh grader or not. The last question for the evaluation is should you take the class or not? Would you recommend it to somebody else? (1) “I believe this class is one of the most mind-opening experiences of my life.” (2) “No. It’s a waste of a course.”  (3) “It gets kind of depressing at times, but I suppose that’s due to the nature of the subject .” (4) “This course stands out as one of the more unique and stimulating courses I’ve taken at Yale.” (5) “Excellent class. It made me think about life and death in a new way. What more can you ask for from a class?” (6) “I would not recommend it. The class just seemed to be a platform for Kagan to throw out random ideas and the students were never required to engage in any thought.” Well, that clears that up. Let me end with a couple of other quick remarks. One — these are some of my all-time favorites from previous years. (1) “Not doing the reading didn’t hurt me at all.” Now, these are anonymous comments. I don’t know who wrote this comment. But I do know this. Whoever wrote this remark is an idiot . Whoever wrote this remark seems to be under the impression that the point of being at Yale is to spend $40,000 a year of your parents’ money and get away with learning as little as possible. Well, for those of you who want to try it, you probably could pass this class and maybe even get an okay grade without doing the readings. There’s no final exam. But still, it’s crucial to understand, doing the readings is an important part of learning what this course has to offer. Different quote. “Kagan is a self-righteous little man” ” Now I’ve got to tell you, that bit about being little, that really hurts. Another one. “Great course. Wonderful professor. Fascinating subjects. The deepest thinking I’ve done in my life.” Final quote. “This class taught me how to think more than any other at Yale.”I don’t know whether I pull it off. Pretty obviously, for a number of students, I don’t manage to pull it off, but that’s at least what my aim is. I’m trying to help you think. I welcome you and I hope you’ll be back on Thursday.