Professor Ramamurti Shankar: This is a first part of the year-long course introducing you to all the major ideas in physics, starting from Galileo and Newton right up to the big revolutions of the last century, which was on relativity and quantum mechanics. The target audience for this course is really very broad. In fact, I’ve always been surprised at how broad the representation is. I don’t know what your major is; I don’t know what you are going to do later so I picked the topics that all of us in physics find fascinating. Some may or may not be useful, but you just don’t know. Some of you are probably going to be doctors and you don’t know why I’m going to do special relativity or quantum mechanics, but you don’t know when it will come in handy. If you’re a doctor and you’ve got a patient who’s running away from you at the speed of light, you’ll know what to do. Or, if you’re a pediatrician with a really small patient who will not sit still, it’s because the laws of quantum mechanics don’t allow an object to have a definite position and momentum. So these are all things you just don’t know when they will come in handy, and I teach them because these are the things that turn me on and got me going into physics and whether or not you go into physics, you should certainly learn about the biggest and most interesting revolutions right up to present day physics.All right. So that’s what the subject matter’s going to be, and I’m going to tell you a little bit about how the course is organized. First thing is, this year it’s going to be taped. You can see some people in the back with cameras as part of an experimental pilot program funded by the Hewlett Foundation and at some point they will decide what they will do with these lectures. Most probably they’ll post them somewhere so people elsewhere can have the benefit of what you have sitting in the classroom. So I’ve been told that from now on we just ignore the camera and do business as usual. Nothing’s going to be changed. I tried to negotiate a laugh track so that if the jokes don’t work we can superimpose some laughter. I was told “no.” I just got to deal with it as it happens. So it’s going to be–it’s like one of the reality shows where things are going to be as they are and hopefully after a while we’ll learn to act and behave normally and not worry about its presence. Then, coming to the rest of the details of the course. By the way, there are more details on the website that I posted, that was given to me by the university, if you want to know more about what all this is about.The course organization is fairly simple. We’re going to meet Monday and Wednesday in this room, 11:30-12:45. I will give you some problems to do on Wednesday and I’ll post them on the website. You guys should get used to going to the class’ website. I’m really, really dependent on that now. I finally learned how to use it. I will use that to post information, maybe once in a while send e-mail to the whole class. If you want to get those e-mails, you got to sign up for the course because I push a button and it goes to anybody who’s signed up there. The homework will be given on Wednesday and it’s due before class the following Wednesday.Let me introduce you to our head TA, Mara Daniel, who’s recently Mara Baraban. So Mara’s going to be the person who will see you after class and she will take the problem sets that you have submitted before class and she’ll give you the graded ones after class. Okay? That will be sorted up, it’ll be up there. So you should drop the homework before you come into class, rather than furiously work on it during class, and the solutions will be posted the same afternoon. So there is not much point in giving homework that’s late. But once in a while, you know, you will come up with a reason that I just cannot argue with. You got married, you’re getting a transplant, whatever it is. That’s fine. You got a transplant, I want to see the old body part. You got married, I want to see your spouse. If something happened to a grandparent, I’m counting. Up to four I don’t get suspicious. Go five, six, seven, eight, I will have to look into the family tree. But, you know, any reasonable excuse will be entertained.Relative importance given to these different things, there’s 20% for your homework, 30% for the Midterm, which will be sometime in October, and 50% for the Final. That’ll be the weighted average. But I have another plan called the “Amnesty Plan” in which I also compare just your final grade, what you did on the Final exam, and whichever is higher of the two is what I will take to determine your overall course grade. This is something I used to announce near the end but then some people felt that it’s not fair not to know this from the beginning. So, I’m telling you from the beginning, but don’t dream and think that somehow the Final’s going to be so much different from your regular day-to-day performance, but to give you some reason to live after the Midterm. So, you feel there is hope. I can change everything overnight; it does happen. I put that in for a reason because sometimes some of you have not taken a physics course and you don’t know how to do well in physics and slowly you catch on and by the time it’s Final exam you crack the code; you know how to do well. As far as I’m concerned, that’s just fine. If at the end of the semester you take a three-hour exam in a closed environment and you answer everything, I don’t care what you did in your homework or your Midterm. That’s not relevant.So that’s how the grading will be done. We have Mara’s group of TAs. She is the head TA and she’s the one you should write to whenever you have a problem. Then we also have two faculty members. One is a Postdoctoral Fellow, Mark Caprio. So he will have a discussion section on Tuesdays between 1:00-2:00 in Sloane Lab. And Steve Furlanetto–I don’t know if Steve is here or not. There’s Steve, our new Assistant Professor. He will have his section on Tuesday night in Dunham Lab, in Room 220. Tuesday night is the night when you people realize homework is due on Wednesday. So we know that, so he will be there to comfort you and give you whatever help you need. All right. My own office hours I’ve not determined yet. I will have to find out when it is good for you. You know, I live and work out of Sloane Lab up on the hill and it was easy to have office hours before or after class but now you have to make a special trip. So, just give me a little bit of time to find out maybe by soliciting e-mail responses from you what would be a good time for my office hours. But for any procedural things, like, you know, this problem set was not graded properly, and so on, there’s no point e-mailing me because I’m going to send it to Mara anyway. So directly deal with the powers that be.Okay, finally I want to give you some tips on how to do well in this course and what attitude you should have. First, I advise that you should come to the lectures. It’s not self-serving; it’s not so much for my benefit. I think there is something useful about hearing the subject presented once orally. Secondly, the book, you can see, one of you had a book here, it’s about 1,100 pages and when I learned physics it was, like 300 pages. Now, I look around this room, I don’t see anybody whose head is three times bigger than mine, so I know that you cannot digest everything the books have. So I have to take out what I think is the really essential part and cover them in the lecture. So, you come to class to find out what’s in and what’s not in. If you don’t do that, there’s a danger you will learn something you don’t have to, and we don’t want that. Okay, so that’s why you come to class.Second thing, most important thing for doing well in physics, is to do the homework. The 20% given to the homework is not a real measure of how important it is. Homework is when you really figure out how much you know and don’t know. If you watch me do the thing on the blackboard, it looks very reasonable. It looks like you can do it but the only way you’re going to find out is when you actually deal with the problem. That’s the only time you’re going to find out. So, I ask you to do the problems as and when they’re posted. So if I post it on Wednesday to cover the material for that week, then you should attempt it as quickly as possible because I’m going to assume you have done the problems when you come for the next few lectures. And in doing the homework, it is perfectly okay to work in groups. You don’t have to do it by yourself. That’s not how physics is done. I am now writing a paper with two other people. They are my experimental colleagues who write papers with 400 other people, maybe even 1, 000 other people. When they do the big collider experiments in Geneva or Fermilab, collaborations can run into hundreds. So, it’s perfectly okay to be part of a collaboration, but you’ve got to make sure that you’re pulling your weight. You’ve got to make sure that if you explain to others how to do this problem, then somebody else contributes to something else, but you know what everybody contributed in the end. So the game is not just to somehow or other get the solution to the problem set but to fully understand how it’s done, and the TAs will be there to help you.Every day there’s going to be a TA in the undergraduate lounge. I would urge you to use that. That’s a beautiful new lounge that the Provost’s Office allowed us to build for physicists and chemists, or whoever happens to be in the building. If you go there on the third floor of Sloane, you may run into other people like you who are trying to work on problems. You may run into upper-class students, students who are more advanced, you will run into your TA. So that’s a good climate. There are coffee machines and there are lounge sofas and everything else. There are computers, there are printers, so it’s a good lounge, and I think if you go there one day a week to do your problem sets, more often that’s a good meeting place, I recommend that.The final piece of advice, this is very important so please pay attention to this, which is, I ask you not to talk to your neighbors during lecture. Now, this looks like a very innocuous thing, but you will find out, it is the only thing that really gets my back up. Most of the time I don’t really care. I’m really liberal, but this disturbs me because I am looking at you, I’m trying to see from your reaction how much of my lecture you are following, and then it’s very distracting when people are talking. So please don’t do that. If you talk, I am going to assume you are talking about me. If you laugh, I’m going to assume you are laughing at me. That’s not really what I think, but that’s how disturbing it is when people talk, and very nice students who do not realize this often disrupt my line of thinking. So I ask you to keep that to a minimum. Once in a while you’ll have to talk to your neighbor and say, “Can you please pass me my pacemaker that fell down?” That’s fine. Then you go back to your business. But don’t do too much of that.Finally, there is this ancient issue about sleeping in class. Now, my view is, it’s just fine, okay. I know you guys need the rest and interestingly, the best sleepers are in the first couple of rows. I haven’t met you guys. It’s not personal. I have found some people really have to come to the first and second row because they claim that if they don’t hear me they cannot really go to sleep. Now, that was true in Sloane but I think Luce has got very good acoustics so you can stretch out in the back. But my only criterion is if you talk in your sleep, now that’s not allowed because talking is not allowed. Next, if you’re going to sleep, I ask you to sit between two non-sleepers because sometimes what happens, the whole row will topple over. We don’t want the domino effect. Now, it’s going to be captured on tape and that’s going to be really bad for my reputation, so spread yourself around other people. All right. So that’s it in terms of class, you know, logistics and everything.I’m going to start going into the physics proper. I will try to finish every lecture on time, but sometimes if I’m in the middle of a sentence or the middle of a derivation, I may have to go over by a couple of minutes; there’s no need to shuffle your feet and move stuff around. I know what time it is. I also want to get out like you guys, but let me finish something. Other days I may finish a few minutes before time. That’s because the ideas of physics don’t fall into 75-minute segments and sometimes they spill over a little bit. Also, I’m used to teaching this course three times a week and now it’s suddenly twice a week, and so things that fell into nice 50-minute units are now being snipped up different ways so it’s pretty difficult. So, even for me, some of it will be new and the timing may not be just right. I should tell you first of all that in this class, the taping is not going to affect you because the camera is going to be behind your head. I mentioned to you in the website that this is not the big opportunity you’ve been looking for to be a star. Only the back of your head will be seen. In some cases, the back of the head could be more expressive than the front, in which case this is your opportunity and I wish you luck. But otherwise, just don’t worry about it because you will be only heard. You may not even be heard. So, I’ve been asked that if a question is not very clear, I should repeat it so that people listening to it later will know what the question was.Let me make one thing very clear. That is, I’m not in favor of your talking to each other because you’re distracting. Your stopping me at any time is just fine. I welcome that because I’ve seen this subject for God knows how many years. The only thing that makes it different for me is the questions that you people have. You can stop me any time and you should not feel somehow you are stopping the progress of the class. There is no fixed syllabus. We can move things around and it’s far more exciting for me to answer your questions than to have a monologue. So, don’t worry about that. So stop me anytime you don’t follow something, and don’t assume that you’re not following something because there’s something wrong with your level of comprehension. Quite often, you guys come up with questions that never cross my mind, so it’s very interesting. And things we’ve been repeating year after year after year, because they sound so reasonable, suddenly sound unreasonable when some of you point out some aspect of it that you didn’t follow. So, it could be very interesting for all of us to have issues to discuss in class, and quite often some questions are very common and your classmates will be grateful to you that you brought it up. Otherwise, you know, TAs get ten e-mails, all with the same question. Okay. So I’m going to start now. Anybody have any questions about class? The format? The Midterm? The exams? All right. Yes?Student: You said there’s going to be two hours to be announced. How do we wait for Professor Ramamurti Shankar: Oh, you mean my office hours?Student: No. I thought there was an Professor Ramamurti Shankar: No, the discussion sections are Tuesday afternoon from 1:00-2:00, and Tuesday night from 8:00-10:00, and the website has got all the details on when and where. Yes?Student: So the lab times will still be Professor Ramamurti Shankar: Yeah. There are many, many lab times and you have to go to the website for the lab. And, by the way, that reminds me. I’ve got here lots of flyers given to me by the director of the laboratories which will tell you which lab is the right lab for you, and they’re offered many times a week. Yes?Student: As far as knowing the material, just from your class, how important is taking a lab concurrent with this class?Professor Ramamurti Shankar: I think it’s a good idea to take the lab, particularly in this particular class because I don’t have any demonstrations. They’re all in the other building. So, this will remind you that physics is, after all, an experimental science and you will be able to see where all the laws of physics come from. So, if you’re going to take it, you should take it at the same time. Yes?Student: Could you please talk about when you expect Professor Ramamurti Shankar: Ah, very good. This is a calculus-based class and I expect everyone to know at least the rudiments of differential calculus. What’s a function, what’s a derivative, what’s a second derivative, how to take derivatives of elementary functions, how to do elementary integrals. Sometime later, I will deal with functions of more than one variable, which I will briefly introduce to you, because that may not be a prerequisite but certainly something you will learn and you may use on and off. But there are different ways of doing physics. Mine is to demonstrate over and over how little mathematics you need to get the job done. There are others who like to show you how much mathematics you could somehow insinuate into the process, okay.There are different ways of playing the game, and some of us find great pride in finding the most simple way to understand something. That’s certainly my trademark; that’s how I do my research also. So, if you feel there’s not enough math used, I guarantee you that I certainly know enough eventually to snow the whole class, but that’s not the point. I will use it in moderation and use it to the best effect possible rather than use it because it is there. Okay. So I don’t know your mathematical background, but the textbook has an appendix, which is a reasonable measure of how much math you should know. You’ve got to know your trigonometry, you’ve got to know what’s a sine and what’s a cosine. You cannot say, “I will look it up.” Your birthday and social security number is what you look up. Trigonometry functions you know all the time. Okay. I will ask you, and you do. All right. And of course, there’s trigonometric identities you know from high school. Pages and pages of them, so no one expects you to know all those identities, but there are a few popular ones we will use. All right. Anything else? Yes?Student: This may be a bit early, but when will we be having our Midterm?Professor Ramamurti Shankar: Yeah. Midterm will be sometime around 20th of October. I have to find out exactly the right time. We have 24 lectures for this class and the first 12 roughly will be part of the Midterm, but after the 12th lecture I may wait a week so that you have time to do the problems and get the solutions. Then I will give you the Midterm. Yes?Student: If wanting one of the two lab courses, which one do you recommend?Professor Ramamurti Shankar: Yeah, this tells you in detail. This flyer answers exactly that. Okay, there was one more question from somebody? Yes?Student: A few people I’ve talked to have recommended that we start taking the lab second semester instead of first. Would that be advisable or should we take both concurrently?Professor Ramamurti Shankar: I don’t have a strong view. I think you should take the lab sometime but I don’t know how many semesters that you have to take. But I would say the advice of your predecessors is very important. If they tell you this is what works, that’s better than what somebody like me can tell you. Also, you should talk to Stephen Irons, who is the director of the labs. He has seen every possible situation. He will give you good advice.Let’s start now. Okay. So we are going to be studying in the beginning what’s called Newtonian mechanics. It’s pretty remarkable that the whole edifice is set up by just one person - Newton – and he sent us on the road to understanding all the natural phenomena until the year 18-hundred-and-something when Maxwell invented the laws of electromagnetism and wrote down the famous Maxwell equations. Except for electromagnetism, the basics of mechanics, which is the motion of billiard balls and trucks and marbles and whatnot, was set up by Newton. So that’s what we are going to focus on, and you will find out that the laws of physics for this entire semester certainly can be written on one of those blackboards or even half of those blackboards.And the purpose of this course is to show you over and over and over again that starting with those one or two laws, you can deduce everything, and I would encourage you to think the same way. In fact, I would encourage you to think the way physicists do, even if you don’t plan to be a physicist, because that’s the easiest way to do this subject, and that is to follow the reasoning behind everything I give you. And my purpose will be not to say something as a postulate, but to show you where everything comes from, and it’s best for you if you try to follow the logic. That way, you don’t have to store too many things in your head. In the early days when there are four or five formulas, you could memorize all of them and you can try each one of them until something works, but after a couple of weeks you will have a hundred formulas and you cannot memorize all of them. You cannot resort to trial and error. So you have to know the logic. So the logical way is not just the way the physicists do it, it’s the easier way to do it. If there is another way that it will work for non-physicists, I won’t hesitate to teach it to you that way if that turns out to be the best way. So try to follow the logic of everything. Okay.So, Newtonian mechanics is our first topic. So, Newtonian mechanics has two parts. All of physics is a two-part program. The plan, every time, is to predict the future given the present. That’s what we always do. When we do that right, we are satisfied. So the question is, “What do you mean by ‘predict the future?’” What do you mean by the future? What do you mean by the present? By “present,” we mean–we will pick some part of the universe we want to study and we will ask, “What information do I need to know for that system at the initial time, like, right now, in order to be able to predict the future?” So, for example, if you were trying to study the motion of some object, here is one example.Professor Ramamurti Shankar: See, that’s an example of Newtonian mechanics. I’ll give you one more demonstration. Let’s see who can catch this one.Professor Ramamurti Shankar: That’s a good example. So, that was Newtonian mechanics at work, because what did I do? I released a piece of candy, threw it from my hand, and the initial conditions have to do with where did I release it and with what velocity. That’s what he sees with his eyes. Then that’s all you really need to know. Then he knows it’s going to go up, it’s going to curve, follow some kind of parabola, then his hands go there to receive it. That is verification of a prediction. His prediction was, the candy’s going to land here, then he put his hand there. He also knew where the candy was going to land, but he couldn’t get his hand there in time. But we can always make predictions. But this is a good example of what you need to know. What is it you have to know about this object that was thrown, I claim, is the initial location of the object and the initial velocity. The fact that it was blue or red is not relevant, and if I threw a gorilla at him it doesn’t matter what the color of the gorilla is, what mood it is in. These are things we don’t deal with in physics.There is a tall building, a standard physics problem. An object falls off a tall building. Object could be a person. So we don’t ask why is this guy ending it all today? We don’t know, and we cannot deal with that. So we don’t answer everything. We just want to know when he’s going to hit the pavement, and with what speed. So we ask very limited questions, which is why we brag about how accurately we can predict the future. So, we only ask limited goals and we are really successful in satisfying them. So, we are basically dealing with inanimate objects.So the product of Newtonian mechanics of predicting the future given the present, has got two parts, and one is called kinematics and the other is called dynamics. So, kinematics is a complete description of the present. It’s a list of what you have to know about a system right now. For example, if you’re talking about the chalk–if I throw the chalk, you will have to know where it is and how fast it’s moving. Dynamics then tells you why the object goes up, why the object goes down and why is it pulled down and so on. That’s dynamics. The reason it comes down is gravity is pulling it. In kinematics, you don’t ask the reason behind anything. You simply want to describe things the way they are and then dynamics tells you how they changed and why they changed.So, I’m going to illustrate the idea of kinematics by taking the simplest possible example. That’s going to be the way I’m going to do everything in this course. I’m going to start with the simplest example and slowly add on bells and whistles and make it more and more complicated. So, some of you might say, “Well, I’ve seen this before,” so maybe there is nothing new here. That may well be. I don’t know how much you’ve seen, but quite often the way you learned physics earlier on in high school is probably different from the way professional physicists think about it. The sense of values we have, the things that we get excited about are different, and the problems may be more difficult. But I want to start in every example, in every situation that I explain to you, with the simplest example, and slowly add on things.So, what we are going to study now is a non-living object and we’re going to pick it to be a mathematical point. So the object is a mathematical point. It has no size. If you rotate it, you won’t know. It’s not like a potato. You take a potato, you turn it around, it looks different. So, it’s not enough to say the potato is here. You’ve got to say which way the nose is pointing and so on. So, we don’t want to deal with that now. That comes later when we study what we call “rigid bodies”. Right now, we want to study an entity which has no spatial extent. So just a dot, and the dot can move around all over space. So we’re going to simplify that too. We’re going to take an entity that lives along the x axis.It moves along a line. So you can imagine a bead with a wire going through it and the bead can only slide back and forth. So, this is about the simplest thing. I cannot reduce the number of dimensions. One is the lowest dimension. I cannot make the object simpler than being just a mathematical point. Then, you’ve got to say, “What do I have to know about this object at the initial time? What constitutes the present, or what constitutes maximal information about the present?” So what we do is we pick an origin, call it zero, we put some markers there to measure distance, and we say this guy is sitting at 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. He is sitting at x = 5. Now, of course, we’ve got to have units and the units for lengths are going to be meters. The unit for time will be a second, and time will be measured in seconds. Then we’ll come to other units.Right now, in kinematics, this is all you need. Now, there are some tricky problems in the book. Sometimes they give you the speed in miles per hour, kilometers per year, pounds per square foot, whatever it is. You’ve got to learn to transform them, but I won’t do them. I think that’s pretty elementary stuff. But sometimes I might not write the units but I’ve earned the right to do that and you guys haven’t so you’ll have to keep track of your units. Everything’s got to be in the right units. If you don’t have the units, then if you say the answer is 19, then we don’t know what it means. Okay.So here’s an object. At a given instant, it’s got a location. So what we would like to do is to describe what the object does by drawing a graph of time versus space and the graph would be something like this. You’ve got to learn how to read this graph. I’m assuming everyone knows how to read it.This doesn’t mean the object is bobbing up and down. I hope you realize that. Even though the graph is going up and down, the object is moving from left to right. So, for example, when it does this, it’s crossed the origin and is going to the left of the origin. Now, at the left of the origin, it turns around and starts coming to the origin and going to the right. That is x versus t. So, in the language of calculus, x is a function of time and this is a particular function. This function doesn’t have a name. There are other functions which have a name. For example, this is x = t, x = t2, you’re going to have x = sin t and cos t and log t. So some functions have a name, some functions don’t have a name. What a particle tries to do generally is some crazy thing which doesn’t have a name, but it’s a function x (t). So you should know when you look at a graph like this what it’s doing.So, the two most elementary ideas you learn are what is the average velocity of an object, as then ordered by the symbol v-bar. So, the average is found by taking two instants in time, say t1 and later t2, and you find out where it was at t2 minus where it was at t1 and divide by the time. So, the average velocity may not tell you the whole story. For example, if you started here and you did all this and you came back here, the average velocity would be zero, because you start and end at the same value of x, you get something; 0 over time will still be 0. So you cannot tell from the average everything that happened because another way to get the same 0 is to just not move at all. So the average is what it is. It’s an average, it doesn’t give you enough detail. So it’s useful to have the average velocity. It’s useful to have the average acceleration, which you can find by taking similar differences of velocities. But before you even do that, I want to define for you an important concept, which is the velocity at a given time, v (t). So this is the central idea of calculus, right? I am hoping that if you learned your calculus, you learned about derivatives and so on by looking at x versus t.So, I will remind you, again, this is not a course in calculus. I don’t have to do it in any detail. I will draw the famous picture of some particle moving and it’s here at t of some value of x. A little later, which is t + Δt. So  Δt is going to stand always for a small finite integral of time; infinitesimal interval of time not yet 0. So, during that time, the particle has gone from here to there, that is x + Δx, and the average velocity in that interval is  Δx/ Δt. Graphically, this guy is  Δ x and this guy is  Δt, and  Δx over Δt is a ratio. So in calculus, what you want to do is to get the notion of the velocity right now. We all have an intuitive notion of velocity right now. When you’re driving in your car, there’s a needle and the needle says 60; that’s your velocity at this instant. It’s very interesting because velocity seems to require two different times to define it – the initial time and the final time. And yet, you want to talk about the velocity right now. That is the whole triumph of calculus is to know that by looking at the position now, the position slightly later and taking the ratio and bringing later as close as possible to right now, we define a quantity that we can say is the velocity at this instant.So v of t, v(t) is the limit,  Δt goes to 0 of  Δx over  Δt and we use the symbol dx/dt for velocity. So technically, if you ask what does the velocity stand for–Let me draw a general situation. If a particle goes from here to here,  Δx over  Δt, I don’t know how well you can see it in this figure here, is the slope of a straight line connecting these two points, and as the points come closer and closer, the straight line would become tangent to the curve. So the velocity at any part of the curve is tangent to the curve at that point. The tangent of, this angle, this θ, is then  Δx over Δt.Okay, once you can take one derivative, you can take any number of derivatives and the derivative of the velocity is called the acceleration, and we write it as the second derivative of position. So I’m hoping you guys are comfortable with the notion of taking one or two or any number of derivatives. Interestingly, the first two derivatives have a name. The first one is velocity, the second one is acceleration. The third derivative, unfortunately, was never given a name, and I don’t know why. I think the main reason is that there are no equations that involve the third derivative explicitly. F = ma. The a is this fellow here, and nothing else is given an independent name. Of course, you can take a function and take derivatives any number of times. So you are supposed to know, for example, if x(t) is tn, you’re supposed to know dx/dt is ntn-1. Then you’re supposed to know derivatives of simple functions like sines and cosines. So if you don’t know that then, of course, you have to work harder than other people. If you know that, that may be enough for quite some time.Okay, so what I’ve said so far is, a particle moving in time from point to point can be represented by a graph, x versus t. At any point on the graph you can take the derivative, which will be tangent to the curve at each point, and its numerical value will be what you can call the instantaneous velocity of that point and you can take the derivative over the derivative and call it the acceleration. So, we are going to specialize to a very limited class of problems in the rest of this class. A limited class of problems is one in which the acceleration is just a constant. Now, that is not the most general thing, but I’m sure you guys have some idea of why we are interested in that. Does anybody know why so much time is spent on that? Yes?Student: Professor Ramamurti Shankar: Pardon me?Student: Professor Ramamurti Shankar: Right. The most famous example is that when things fall near the surface of the Earth, they all have the same acceleration, and the acceleration that’s constant is called g, and that’s 9.8 meters/second2. So that’s a very typical problem. When you’re falling to the surface of the Earth, you are describing a problem of constant acceleration. That’s why there’s a lot of emphasis on sharpening your teeth by doing this class of problems. So, the question we are going to ask is the following, “If I tell you that a particle has a constant acceleration a, can you tell me what the position x is?”Normally, I will give you a function and tell you to take any number of derivatives. That’s very easy. This is the backwards problem. You’re only given the particle has acceleration a, and you are asked to find out what is x? In other words, your job is to guess a function whose second derivative is a, and this is called integration, which is the opposite of differentiation, and integration is just guessing. Integration is not an algorithmic process like differentiation. If I give you a function, you know how to take the derivative. Change the independent variable, find the change in the function, take the ratio and that’s the derivative. The opposite is being asked here. I tell you something about the second derivative of a function and ask you what is the function. The way we do that is we guess, and the guessing has been going on for 300 years, so we sort of know how to guess.So, let me think aloud and ask how I will guess in this problem. I would say, okay, this guy wants me to find a function which reduces to the number a when I take two derivatives, and I know somewhere here, this result, which says that when I take a derivative, I lose a power of t. In the end, I don’t want any powers of t. It’s very clear I’ve got to start with a function that looks like t2. This way when I take two derivatives, there will be no t left. Well, unfortunately, we know this is not the right answer, because if you take the first derivative, I get 2t. If I take the second derivative I get 2, but I want to get a and not 2. Then it’s very clear the way you patch it up is you multiply it by this constant and now we’re all set. This function will have the right second derivative. So, this certainly describes a particle whose acceleration is a. The a is not dependent on time. But the question is, is this the most general answer, or is it just one answer, and I think you all know that this is not the most general answer. It is one answer. But I can add to this some number, like 96, that’ll still have the property that if you take two derivatives, you’re going to get the same acceleration. So 96 now is a typical constant, so I’m going to give the name c to that constant.Everyone knows from calculus that if you’re trying to find a function about which you know only the derivative, you can always add a constant to one person’s answer without changing anything. But I think here, you know you can do more, right? You can add something else to the answer without invalidating it, and that is anything with one power of t in it, because if you take one derivative it’ll survive, but if you take two derivatives, it’ll get wiped out. Now, it’s not obvious but it is true that you cannot add to this anymore. The basic idea in solving these equations and integrating is you find one answer, so then when you take enough derivatives, the function does what it’s supposed to do. But then having found one answer, you can add to it anything that gets killed by the act of taking derivatives. If you’re taking only one derivative you can add a constant. If you’re taking two derivatives you can add a constant and something linear in t.. If you knew only the third derivative of the function, you can have something quadratic in t without changing the outcome.So, this is the most general position for a particle of constant acceleration, a. Now, you must remember that this describes a particle going side to side. I can also describe a particle going up and down. If I do that, I would like to call the coordinate y, then I will write the same thing. You’ve got to realize that in calculus, the symbols that you call x and y are completely arbitrary. If you know the second derivative of y to be a, then the answer looks like this. If you knew the second derivative of x, the answer looks like that. Now, we have to ask what are these numbers, b and c.So let me go back now to this expression, x(t) = at2/ 2 + c + bt. It is true mathematically, you can add two numbers, but you’ve got to ask yourself, “What am I doing as a physicist when I add these two numbers?” What am I supposed to do with a and b? I mean, with the b and c? What value should I pick? The answer is that simply knowing the particle has an acceleration is not enough to tell you where the particle will be. For example, let’s take the case where the particle is falling under gravity. Then you guys know, you just told me, acceleration is -9.8, my g is -9.8. We call it “minus” because it’s accelerating down and up was taken to be the positive direction. In that case, y(t) will be -1/2gt2 + c + bt.So, the point is, every object falling under gravity is given by the same formula, but there are many, many objects that can have many histories, all falling under gravity, and what’s different from one object and the other object is, when was it dropped, from what height, and with what initial speed. That’s what these numbers are going to tell us and we can verify that as follows. If you want to know what the number c is, you say, let’s put time t = 0. In fact, let me go back to this equation here. You’ll put time t = 0, x(0) doesn’t have this term, doesn’t have this term, and it is c. So I realize that the constant, c, is the initial location of the object, and it’s very common to denote that by x0.So the meaning of the constant c is where was the object at the initial time? It could’ve been anywhere. Simply knowing the acceleration is not enough to tell you where it was at the initial time. You get to pick where it was at the initial time. Then, to find the meaning of b, we take one derivative of this, dx/dt, that’s velocity as a function of time, and if you took the derivative of this guy, you will find as at + b. That’s the velocity of the object. Then, you can then understand that v(0) is what b is, which we write as v0. Okay, so the final answer is that x(t) looks like x0 + v0 t + 1/2 at2. Okay. So what I’m saying here is we are specializing to a limited class of motion where the particle has a definite acceleration, a. Then, in every situation where the body has an acceleration a, the location has to have this form, where this number (x0) is where it was initially, this (v0 ) was the initial velocity of the object. So, when I threw that thing up and you caught it, what you are doing mentally was immediately figuring out where it started and at what speed. That was your initial data. Then in your mind, without realizing it, you found the trajectory at all future times.Now, there is one other celebrated formula that goes with this. I’m going to find that, then I’ll give you an example. Now, I’m fully aware that this is not the flashiest example in physics, but I’m not worried about that right now. You’ll see enough things that will confound you, but right now I want to demonstrate a simple paradigm of what it means to know the present and what it means to say this is what the future behavior will be. We want to do that in the simplest context, then we can make the example more and more complicated, but the phenomenon will be the same. So, what we have found out so far, I’m purposely going from x to y because I want you to know that the unknown variable can be called an x or can be called a y. It doesn’t matter, as long as the second derivative is a; that’s the answer.Now there’s a second formula one derives from this. You guys probably know that too from your days at the daycare, but I want to derive the formula and put it up, then we’ll see how to use it. Second formula tries to relate the final velocity of some time, t, to the initial velocity and the distance traveled with no reference to time. So the trick is to eliminate time from this equation.So let’s see how we can eliminate time. You know that if you took a derivative of this, you will find v(t) is v0 + at. What that means is, if you know the velocity of the given time and you know the initial velocity, you know what time it is. The time, in fact, is v - v0 over a. If I don’t show you any argument for v, it means v at time t and the subscript of 0 means t is zero. So what this says is, you can measure time by having your own clock. A clock tells you what time it is, but you can also say what time it is by seeing how fast the particle is moving because you know it started with some speed. It’s gaining speed at some rate a. So, if the speed was so and so now, then the time had to be this. So time can be indirectly inferred from these quantities. Then you take that formula here (t) and you put it here, (y(t)) to see a times t, you put this expression. So what will you get? We’ll get an expression in which there is no t; t has been banished in favor of v. So, I’m not going to waste your time by asking what happens if you put it in. I will just tell you want happens. What happens is, you will find that v2 = vo2 + 2a times (y- y0).  How many people have seen this thing before? Okay. That’s a lot. Look, I know you’ve seen this.At the moment, I have to go through some of the more standard material before we go to the more non-standard material. If this part’s very easy for you, there’s not much I can do right now. So let me draw a box. Drawing a box to you guys means important. These are the two important things. Remember, I want you to understand one thing. How much of this should you memorize? Suppose you’ve never seen this in high school. How much are you supposed to memorize? I would say, keep that to a minimum, because what the first formula tells you should be so intuitive that you don’t have to cram this. We are talking about particles of constant acceleration. That means, when I take two derivatives, I want to get a, then you should know enough calculus to know it has to be something like at2, and half comes from taking two derivatives. The other two you know are stuff you can add, and you know where you’re adding those things, because the particle has a head start. It’s got an initial position. Even at = 0, and it has an initial velocity, so even without any acceleration, it will be moving from y0 to y0 + vt. The acceleration gives you an extra stuff, quadratic in time. Once you’ve got that, one derivative will give you the velocity, then in a crunch you can eliminate t and put it into this formula. But most people end up memorizing these two because you use it so many times. It eventually sticks in you but you shouldn’t try to memorize everything.So, we are now going to do one standard problem where we will convince ourselves we can apply this formulae and predict the future given the present. So the problem I want to do–there are many things you could do but I just picked one, and this is the one with round numbers so I can do it without a calculator. Here’s the problem. There is this building and it’s going to be 15 meters high, and I’m going to throw something and it’s going to go up and come down. It’s something I throw up has an initial speed of 10 meters per second. So we have to ask now, now that my claim is, you can ask me any question you want about this particle and I can answer you. You can ask me where it will be nine seconds from now, eight seconds from now, how fast will it be moving. I can answer anything at all. But what I needed to do this problem was to find these two unknowns. So, you’ve got to get used to the notion of what will be given in general and what is tailor-made to the occasion. So, we know in this example the initial height should be 15 meters and the initial velocity should be 10, and for acceleration, I’m going to use -g and to keep life simple, I’m going to call it -10. As you know, the correct answer is 9.8, but we don’t want to use the calculator now so we’ll call it -10. Consequently, for this object the position y, at any time t is known to be 15 + 10t - 5t2. That is the full story of this object. Of course, you’ve got to be a little careful when you use it. For example, let’s put t equal to 10,000 years. What are you going to get? When t is equal to 10,000 years or 10000 seconds, you’re going to find y is some huge negative number. You know, that’s not right, what’s wrong with that reasoning?Student: Professor Ramamurti Shankar: So you cannot use the formula once it hits the ground because once it hits the ground, the fundamental premise that a was a constant of -9.8 or -10 is wrong. So that’s another thing to remember. Once you get a formula, you’ve got to always remember the terms under which the formula was derived. If you blindly use it beyond its validity, you will get results which don’t make any sense. Conversely, if you get an answer and it doesn’t seem to make sense, then you’ve got to go back and ask, am I violating some of the assumptions, and here you will find the assumption that the particle had that acceleration a is true as long it’s freely falling under gravity but not when you hit the ground. Now, if you dug a hole here until there, and of course it may work until that happens, okay. But you’ve got them every time. This is so obvious in this problem, but when you see more complicated formula, you may not know all the assumptions that went into the derivation and quite often you will be using it when you shouldn’t. All right.See, this you agree, is a complete solution to this miniature, tiny, Mickey-Mouse problem. You give me the time and I’ll tell you where it is. If you want to know how fast it’s moving at a given time, if you want to know the velocity, I just take the derivative of this answer, which is 10 - 10t. So let me pick a couple of trivial questions one can ask. One can ask the following question. How high does it go? How high will it rise? To what height will it rise? So, we know it’s going to go up and turn around and come down. We’re trying to see how high that is. So, that is a tricky problem to begin with because if you take this formula here, it tells you y if you know t, but no, we’re not saying that. We don’t know the time and we don’t know how high it’s rising so you can ask, “How am I supposed to deal with this problem?” Then you put something else that you know in your mind, which is that the highest point is the point when it’s neither going up nor coming down. If it’s going up, that’s not the highest point. If it’s coming down, that’s not the highest point. So at the highest point it cannot go up and it cannot go down. That’s the point where velocity is 0. If you do that, let’s call the particular time t*, then 10t* - 10 = 0, or t* is 1 second. So we know that it’ll go up for one second then it will turn around and come back.Now, we are done because now we can ask how high does it go, and you go back to your, and y (1) is 15 + 10 - 5, which is what? Twenty meters. By the way, you will find that I make quite a lot of mistakes on the blackboard. You’re going to find out, you know, one of these years when you start teaching that when you get really close to a blackboard, you just cannot think. There’s definitely some inverse correlation between your level of thinking and the proximity to the blackboard. So if you find me making a mistake, you’ve got to stop me. Why do you stop me? For two reasons. First of all, I’m very pleased when this happens, because I’m pretty confident that I can do this under duress, but I may not do it right every time. But if my students can catch me making a mistake, it means they are following it and they are not hesitating to tell me. Secondly, as we go to the more advanced part of the course, we’ll take a result from this part of the blackboard, stick it into the second part and keep manipulating, so if I screwed up in the beginning and you guys keep quiet, we’ll have to do the whole thing again.I would ask you when you follow this thing to do it actively. Try to be one step ahead of me. For example, if I’m struck by lightning, can you do anything? Can you guess what I’m going to say next? Do you have any idea where this is going? You should have a clue. If I die and you stop, that’s not a good sign, okay. You’ve got to keep going a little further because you should follow the logic. So, for example, you know, I’m going to calculate next when it hits the ground. You should have some idea of how I’ll do it. But this is not a spectator sport. If you just watch me, you’re going to learn nothing. It’s like watching the U.S. Open and thinking you’re some kind of a player. You will have to shed the tears and you’ve got to bang your head on the wall and go through your own private struggle. I cannot do that for you. I cannot even make it look hard because I have memorized this problem from childhood, so there is no way I can make this look difficult. That’s your job.All right. So, we know this point at one second is 20 meters, so let’s just ask one other question and we’ll stop. One other question may be, “When does it hit the ground and at what speed?” – a typical physics question. So when does it hit the ground? Well, I think you must know now how to formulate that question. “When does it hit the ground” is “When is y = 0”? By the way, I didn’t tell you this but I think you know that I picked my origin to be here and measured y positively to be upwards and I called that 15 meters. You can call that your origin. If you call that your origin, your y0 will be 0, but ground will be called -15. So, in the end, the physics is the same but the numbers describing it can be different. We have to interpret the data differently. But the standard origin for everybody is the foot of the building. You can pick your origin here, some crazy spot. It doesn’t matter. But some origins are more equal than others because there is some natural landmark there. Here, the foot of the building is what I call the origin. So, in that notation, I want to ask, when is y = 0? I ask when y = 0, then I say 0 = 15 + 10t - 5t2. Or I’m canceling the 5 everywhere and changing the sign here I get t2 - 2t - 3 = 0. That’s when it hits the ground. So let’s find out what the time is. So t is then 2 + or - or + 12 over 2, which is 2 + or - 4 over 2, which is -1 or 3. Okay, so you get two answers when it hits the ground. So it’s clear that we should pick 3. But you can ask, “Why is it giving me a second solution?” Anybody have an idea why?Student: Because there was an entire parabola Professor Ramamurti Shankar: That’s correct. So her answer was, if it was a full parabola, then we know it would’ve been at the ground before I set my clock to 0. First of all, negative time should not bother anybody; t = 0 is when I set the clock, I measured time forward, but yesterday would be t = -1 day, right? So we don’t have any trouble with negative times. So the point is, this equation, it does not know about the building. Doesn’t know the whole song and dance that you went to a building and you threw up a rock or anything. What does the mathematics know? It knows that this particle happened to have a height of 15, a time 0, and a velocity of 10, a time 0, and it is falling under gravity with an acceleration of -10. That’s all it knows. If that’s all it knows, then in that scenario there is no building or anything else; it continues a trajectory both forward in time and backward in time, and it says that whatever seconds, one second before you set your clock to 0, it would’ve been on the ground. What it means is if you’d release a rock at that location one second before with a certain speed that we can calculate, it would’ve ended up here with precisely the position and velocity it had at the beginning of our experiment.So sometimes the extra solution is very interesting and you should always listen to the mathematics when you get extra solutions. In fact, when a very famous physicist, Paul Dirac, was looking for the energy of a particle in relativistic quantum mechanics, he found the energy of a particle is connected to its momentum, this p is what we call momentum, and its mass by this relation. It’s a particle of mass m and momentum p has this energy so you solve for the energy, you get two answers. Now, your temptation is to keep the first answer because you know energy is not going to be negative. Particle’s moving, it’s got some energy and that’s it. But the mathematicians told Dirac, “You cannot ignore the negative energy solution because it tells you there’s a second solution and you cannot throw them out,” and it turns out the second solution, with negative energy, was when the theory is telling you, hey, there are particles and there are anti-particles, and the negative energy when properly interpreted will describe anti-particles. So the equations are very smart.The way the physics works is you will find some laws of motion in mathematical form, you put in the initial conditions of whatever, you solve the equations, and the answer that comes, you have no choice. You have to accept the answer, but there are new answers besides the one you were looking for. You’ve got to think about what they mean, and that’s one of the best things about physics because here’s a person who is not looking for anti-particles. He was trying to describe electrons, but the theory said there are two roots in the quadratic equation and the second root is mathematically as interesting as the first one. It has to be part of a theory, and then trying to adjust it so it can be incorporated, you discover anti-particles. So always amazing to us how we go into the problem, our eye or mind can see one class of solutions, but the math will tell you sometimes there are new solutions and you’ve got to respect it and understand and interpret the unwanted solutions, and this is a simple example where you can follow what the meaning of the second solution is. It means that to the problem you pose, there’s more than the answers that you could imagine. Here it meant particle that was released from the ground earlier. There it meant something much more interesting, mainly anti-particles accompanying particles. They are going to accompany particles surely as every quadratic equation has two solutions.All right, so now in this problem, we can do something slightly different, and let’s use this expression here, and I will do that, then I’ll stop for today. If you were asking questions, like, how high does it go, but you don’t ask when does it go to the highest point, then you don’t have to go through the whole process of finding the time at which it turned around. I don’t know where that is, that disappeared on the blackboard, then putting the time equal to 1 second into this formula. If the question of time is not explicitly brought up, then you should know that you have to use this formula. So how do we get it here? Well, we say at the top of the loop, when it goes up and comes down the velocity is 0. Therefore, you say 02 = initial velocity2 + 2 times -g, that’s my acceleration, times y - y0. If you solve for that, you find y - y0 = v02 over 2g, and if you put in the v0 I gave you, which was what, 10? That’s 100 over 20, which is 5 meters. So y = y0 + 5 meters, and that was the height to which it rises. I think we got it somewhere else. We found the maximum height to be 20 meters. Another thing you can do is you can find the speed here. If you want to find the speed there, you put the equation v2 = v02 + 2 times -g (y - y0). What is y - y0? The final y is 0, the initial y is 15. You solve for that equation and you will find the final velocity. So, if time is not involved, you can do it that way.I want to derive the last result in another way, then I will stop, and that’s pretty interesting because it tells you the use and abuse of calculus. So I’m going to find for you this result using calculus in a different way. So, from the calculus we know dv/dt = a. Now, multiply both sides by v. Now you have to know from elementary calculus that v times dv/dt is really d by dt of v2 over 2. Now, I hope you guys know that much calculus, that when you take a derivative of a function of a function, namely v2 over 2 is a function of v, and v itself is a function of t, then the rule for taking the derivative is first take the v derivative of this object, then take the d by dt of t, which is this one. On the right-hand side, I’m going to write as a dx/dt. This much is standard.I’m going to do something which somehow we are told never, ever to do, which is to just cancel the dts. You all know that when you do dy/dx, you’re not supposed to cancel that d. That’s actually correct. You don’t want to cancel the d in the derivative. But this happens to be completely legitimate, so I’m going to assume it’s true and I’ll maybe take a second and explain why it’s legitimate. What this really means is in a given time,  Δt, the change in this quantity is a times the change in this quantity. Therefore, you can multiply both sides by the  Δt, but the only thing you should understand is  Δt, as long as it’s small and finite, will lead to some small infinite errors in the formula, because the formula is really the limit in which  Δx and  Δt both go to 0. So what you have to do is multiply both sides by  Δt, but remember it’s got to be in the end made to be vanishingly small. As long as we understand that, we can do this cancellation and this says on the left-hand side the change in the quantity v2 over 2 is a times the change in the quantity x. So add up all the changes or what you mean by integral. Same thing. Add up all the changes. The change in v2 over 2 will be the final v2 over 2 - the initial v2 over 2 and the other side will be a times change in x; x - x0 and that’s the formula I wrote for you: v2 is v02 + 2a (x - x0).So, the point is whenever you have derivatives with something over dt, do not hesitate to cancel the dts and think of them as  Δv2 over 2 is equal to a times  Δ of x. This will be actually true as long as both quantities are vanishingly small. They will become more and more true as  Δx and  Δv2 become vanishingly small, in the limit in which they are approaching 0, the two will be, in fact, equal. If x is a finite amount, like 1 second, this will not be true because in the starting equation,  Δx and  Δt and  Δv2 were all assumed to be infinitesimal. So don’t hesitate to do manipulations of this type, and I will do them quite often. So you’ve got to understand when it’s okay and when it’s not okay. What this means is, in a time  Δt, this quantity changes by some amount, and in the same time,  Δt, that quantity changes by some amount, then keeping the  Δt equal to some number we may equate the changes of the two quantities, provided it is understood that  Δv2 over 2 is a change in v2 over 2 in the same time in which the particle moved a distance,  Δx. Adding the differences, we eliminate time and we get this final result.All right. So if you go to your website today, you will find I’ve assigned some problems and you should try to do them. They apply to this chapter. Then next week we’ll do more complicated problems that involve motion in higher dimensions, how to go to two dimensions or three dimensions.Professor Ramamurti Shankar: So, I’ve got to start by telling you the syllabus for this term — not the detailed one, just the big game plan. The game plan is: we will do electromagnetic theory. Electromagnetism is a new force that I will introduce to you and go through all the details. And I will do optics, and optics is part of electromagnetism. And then near the end we will do quantum mechanics. Now, quantum mechanics is not like a new force. It’s a whole different ball game. It’s not about what forces are acting on this or that object that make it move, or change its path. The question there is: should we be even thinking about trajectories? Should we be even thinking about particles going on any trajectory? Forget about what the right trajectory is. And you will find out that most of the cherished ideas get destroyed. But the good news is that you need quantum mechanics only to study very tiny things like atoms or molecules. Of course the big question is, you know, where do you draw the line? How small is small? Some people even ask me, “Do you need quantum mechanics to describe the human brain?” And the answer is, “Yes, if it is small enough.” So, I’ve gone to parties where after a few minutes of talking to a person I’m thinking, “Okay, this person’s brain needs a fully quantum mechanical treatment.” But most of the time everything macroscopic you can describe the way you do with Newtonian mechanics, electrodynamics. You don’t need quantum theory.All right, so now we’ll start with the brand new force of electromagnetism. But before doing the force, I’ve got to remind you people of certain things I expect you all to understand about the dynamics between force, and mass, and acceleration that you must have learned last term. I don’t want to take any chances. I’m going to start by reminding you how we use this famous equation of Newton. So you’ve seen this equation, probably, in high school, but it’s a lot more subtle than you think, certainly a lot more subtle than I thought when I first learned it. So I will tell you what I figured out over these years on different ways to look at F = ma. In other words, if you have the equation what’s it good for? The only thing anybody knows right away is a stands for acceleration, and we all know how to measure it. By the way, anytime I write any symbol on the board you should be able to tell me how you’d measure it, otherwise you don’t know what you’re talking about as a physicist.Acceleration, I think I won’t spend too much time on how you measure it. You should know what instruments you will need. So I will remind you that if you have a meter stick, or many meter sticks and clocks you can follow the body as it moves. You can find its position now, its position later, take the difference, divide by the time, you get velocity. Then find the velocity now, find the velocity later, take the difference, divide by time, you’ve got acceleration. So acceleration really requires three measurements, two for each velocity, but we talk of acceleration right now because you can make those three measurements arbitrarily near each other, and in the limit in which the time difference between them goes to zero you can talk about the velocity right now and acceleration right now. But in your car, the needle points at 60 that’s your velocity right now. It’s an instantaneous quantity. And if you step on the gas you feel this push. That’s your acceleration right now. That’s a property of that instant.So we know acceleration, but the question is can I use the equation to find the mass of anything. Now, very often when I pose the question the answer given is, you know, go to a scale, a weighing machine, and find the mass. And as you know, that’s not the correct answer because the weight of an object is related to being near the earth due to gravity, but the mass of an object is defined anywhere. So here’s one way you can do it. Now you might say, “Well, take a known force and find the acceleration it produces,” but we haven’t talked about how to measure the force either. All you have is this equation. The correct thing to do is to buy yourself a spring and go to the Bureau of Standards and tell them to loan you a block of some material, I forgot what it is. That’s called a kilogram. That is a kilogram by definition. There is no God-given way to define mass. You pick a random entity and say that’s a kilogram. So that’s not right and that’s not wrong. That’s what a kilogram is.So you bring that kilogram, you hook it up on the spring, and you pull it by some amount, maybe to that position, and you release it. You notice the acceleration of the 1 kilogram, and the mass of the thing is just one. Then you detach that mass. Then you ask — Then the person says, “What’s the mass of something else?” I don’t know what the something else is. Let’s say a potato. And you take the potato or anything, elephant. Here’s a potato. You pull that guy by the same distance, and you release that, and you find its acceleration. Since you pulled it by the same amount, the force is the same, whatever it is. We don’t know what it is, but it’s the same. Therefore we know the acceleration of 1 kilogram times 1 kilogram is equal to the unknown mass times the acceleration of the unknown mass. That’s how by measuring this you can find what the mass is. In principle you can find the mass of everything.So imagine masses of all objects have been determined by this process. Then you can also use F = ma to find out what forces are acting on bodies in different situations, because if you don’t know what force is acting on a body you cannot predict anything. So you can go back to the spring and say, “I want to know what force the spring exerts when it’s pulled by various amounts. Well, you pull it by some amount x. You attach it to a non-mass and you find the acceleration, and that’s the force. And if you plot it, you’ll find F as a function of x will be roughly a straight line and it will take the form F = -kx, and that k is called a force constant. So this is an example of your finding out the left hand side of Newton’s law. You’ve got to understand the distinction between F = -kx and F = ma. What’s the difference? This says if you know the force I can tell you the acceleration, but it’s your job to go find out every time what forces might be acting on a body. If it’s connected to a spring, and you pull the spring and it exerts a force, someone’s got to make this measurement to find out what the force will be.All right, so that’s one kind of force. Another force that you can find is if you’re near the surface of the earth, if you drop something, it seems to accelerate towards the ground, and everything accelerates by the same amount g. Well, according to Newton’s laws if anything is going to accelerate, it’s because there’s a force on it. The force on any mass m must be mg, because if I divide by m I’ve got to get g. So the force on masses near the earth is mg. That’s another force. Something interesting about that force is that unlike the spring force where the spring is touching the mass, you can see it’s pulling it, or when I push this chair you can see I’m doing it, the pull of gravity is a bit strange, because there is no real contact between the earth and the object that’s falling. It was a great abstraction to believe that things can reach out and pull things which are not touching them, and gravity was the first formally described force where that was true. And another excursion in the same theme is if this object gets very far, say like the moon over there, then the force is not given by mg, but the force is given by this law of gravitation. For every r near the surface of the earth, if you put r equal to the surface of the earth you will get a constant force that is just mg, but if you move far from the center of the earth you’ve got to take that into account, and that’s what Newton did and realized the force goes like 1 over r2.So every time things accelerate you’ve got to find the reason, and that reason is the force. Many times many forces can be acting on a body, and if you put all the forces that are acting on a body and that explains the acceleration, you’re done, but sometimes it won’t. That’s when you have a new force. And the final application of F = ma is this one. If you knew the force, for example, on a planet, and here’s a planet going around the sun and it is here. This is the sun, and you know the force acting on it given by Newton’s Law of Gravity you can find the acceleration that will help you find out where it will be one second later, and you repeat the calculation, you will get the trajectory. So F = ma is good for three things, that’s what I want you to understand: to define mass, to calculate forces acting on bodies by seeing how they accelerate, and finally to find the acceleration of bodies given the forces. This is the cycle of Newtonian dynamics.And what I’m going to do now is to add one more new force, because I’m going to find out that there is another force not listed here. I’m going to demonstrate to you that new force, okay? Here’s my demonstration. The only demonstration you will see in my class, because everything else I’ve tried generally failed, but this one always works. So, I have here a piece of paper, okay? Then I take this trusty comb and I comb the part of my head that’s suited for this experiment, then I bring it next to this, and you see I’m able to lift that. Now, that’s not the force of gravity because gravity doesn’t care if you comb your hair or not, okay? And also when I shake it, it falls down.So you’re thinking, “Okay, maybe there is a new force but it doesn’t look awfully strong because it’s not able to even overcome gravity, because it eventually yielded to gravity and fell down,” but it’s actually a mistake to think so. In fact this new force that I’m talking about is 10 to the power of 40 stronger than gravitational force. I will tell you by what metric I came up with that number, but it’s an enormously strong force. You’ve got to understand why I say it is such a strong force when, when I shook it the thing fell down. So the reason is that if you look at this experiment, here’s the comb and here’s the paper, the comb is trying to pull the paper, but what is trying to pull it down? What is trying to pull it down? So here is me, here is that comb, here’s the paper. The entire planet is pulling it down: Himalayas pulling it down, Pacific Ocean, pulling it down, Bin Laden sitting in his cave pulling it down. Everything is pulling it down, okay? I am one of these people generally convinced the world is acting against me, but this time I’m right. Everything is acting against me, and I’m able to triumph against all of that with this tiny comb. And that is how you compare the electric force with the gravitational force. It takes the entire planet to compensate whatever tiny force I create between the comb and the piece of paper. To really get a number out of this I’ll have to do a little more, but I just want to point out to you this is a new force much stronger than gravitation.So I want to tell you a few other experiments people did without going into what the explanation is right now, but let me just tell you if you go through history what all did people do. So one experiment you can do: You take a piece of glass and you rub it on some animal that’s passing by, water buffalo. That’s why I cannot do all the experiments in class. You rub it on that guy, then you do it to a second piece of glass, and you find out that they repel each other, meaning if you put them next to each other they tend to fly apart. Then you take a piece of hard rubber and you rub that on something else. I forgot what, silk, Yeti, some other thing. Then you put that here. So I’ll give a different shape to that thing. That’s the rubber stick. And you find when you do that to this, these two attract each other. Sometimes they repel, sometimes they attract. Here’s another thing you can do: Buy some nylon thread. You hang a small metallic sphere, and you bring one of these rods next to it. It doesn’t matter which one. Initially they’re attracted and suddenly when you touch it and you remove it, they start repelling each other. What’s going on? That’s another thing you could do. Last thing I want to mention is if you took two of these things which are repelling each other, let’s say. Let’s say they’re attracting each other like this. Then you connect them with a piece of nylon and you take it away, nothing happens. If you connect them with a piece of wire and take away the wire, they no longer attract each other.So these are examples of different things. I’m just going to say, you do this, you do this, you do that, then finally you need a theory that explains everything. So that’s the theory that I’m going to give you now. That’s the theory of electrostatics. And I don’t have time to go into the entire history of how people arrived at this final formula, so I’m just going to tell you one formula that really will explain everything that I’ve described so far, and that formula is called Coulomb’s Law. Even though Mr. Coulomb’s name is on it, he was not the first one to formulate parts of the law, but he gave the final and direct verification of Coulomb’s Law that other people who had contributed. So Coulomb’s Law says that certain entities have a property called charge. You have charge or you don’t have charge, but if you have charge the charge that you have, you meaning any of these objects, is measured in coulombs. Remember, that was not Coulomb’s idea to call it coulomb. Whenever you make a discovery, you’re breathlessly waiting that somebody will name it after you, but it’s not in good taste to name to after yourself, but it carries Coulomb’s name.So he didn’t say call it coulomb, okay, but he certainly wrote down this law. The law says that if you’ve got one entity which has some amount of charge called q1, and there’s another entity that has some amount of charge q2 they will exert a force on each other which is given by q1q2 times this constant which is somehow written as 1 over 4Πε0. That’s 1 over r2. But r is the distance between them, and you can ask in this picture, what do you mean by distance? I mean, is it from here to there, or is it from center to center? We’re assuming here that the distance between them is much bigger than the individual sizes. For example, you say, how far am I from Los Angeles, well, 3,225 miles, but you can say are you taking about your right hand or your left hand? Well, I’m a point particle for this purpose so it doesn’t matter. So here we’re assuming that either they’re mathematically point charges or they’re real charges with a finite size but separated by a distance much bigger than the size, so r could stand, if you like, for center to center. It doesn’t matter too much. So this is what Coulomb said.Now, if you look at this number here, 1 over 4Πε0, its value is 9 times 10 to the 9th. What that means is the following: If you take one body with 1 coulomb of charge, another body with 1 coulomb of charge and they’re separated by 1 meter, then the force between them will be this number, because everything else is a 1. It’ll be 9 times 10 to the 9 newtons. That’s an enormous force, and normally you don’t run into 1 coulomb of charge, but the reason why a coulomb was picked is sort of historical and it has to do with currents and so on. But anyway, this is the definition. But if you want to be more precise, I should write a formula more carefully because force is a vector. Also I should say force on whom and due to what. So let’s say there are two charges, and say q1 is sitting at the origin and q2 is sitting at a point whose position is the vector r. Then the force on 2 due to 1 is given by q2q1 over 4Πε0 times 1 over r2. That’s the magnitude of the force, but I want to suggest that the force is such that q1 pushes q2 away.So I want to make this into a vector, but I’ve got the magnitude of the vector. As you know, to make a real vector you take its magnitude and multiply it by a vector of unit length in that same direction. The unit vector we can write in many ways. One is just to say er, eris a standard name for a vector of length 1 in the direction of r. But I’ll give you another choice. You can also write it as r divided by the length of r. That also would be a vector of unit length parallel to r. So there are many ways to write the thing that makes it a vector. And F21 is minus of F12. Now, how do we get attraction and how do we get repulsion? We get it because q1 and q2, if they’re both positive and you if you use the formula, you’ll find they repel each other, but if they’re of opposite signs, you’ll do the same calculation, but you’ll put a minus sign in front of the whole thing. That’ll turn repulsion into an attraction. So you must allow for the possibility that q can be of either sign; q can also be 0. There are certain entities which don’t have any electric charge, so if you put them next to a million coulombs nothing happens. So some things have plus charge. Some things have minus charge. Some things have no charge, but they’re all contained in this Coulomb’s Law.Now, again, skipping all the intermediate discoveries, I want to tell you a couple of things we know about charge. First thing is: q is conserved. Conserved is a physics terms for saying — does not change with time. For example, when you say energy is conserved, it means particles can come and collide and do all kinds of things, but if you add that energy before, you’ll get the same answer afterwards, and whenever that happens, the quantity is conserved. The claim is electrical charge is conserved. So electrical charge may migrate from A to B or B to A, but if you add up the total charge, say the chemical reaction of any process, including in big particle accelerators where things collide and all kinds of stuff comes flying out, the charge of the final products always equal to the charge of the incoming products.But charge conservation needs to be amended with one extra term, extra qualification. It’s called local. Suppose I say the number of students in the class is conserved? That means you count them any time, you’ve got to get the same number. Well, here’s one possibility. Suddenly one of you guys disappears and appears here at the same instant. That’s also consistent with conservation of student number because the number didn’t change. What disappeared there, appeared here. But that is not a local conservation of charge because it disappears in one part of the world and appears in another one. And it’s not even a meaningful law to have in the presence of relativity. Can any of you guys think of why that might be true, why a charge disappearing somewhere and appearing somewhere else cannot be a very profound principle? Yes?Student: Professor Ramamurti Shankar: Yep?Student: Well, if it’s in the same instant disappearing from one place and appearing another place, it’s traveling faster than light?Professor Ramamurti Shankar: Well, we don’t know that it was the same thing that even traveled. It may not have traveled. It may even be — Here’s another thing. Suppose an electron, suppose a proton disappears there and a positron appears here. That still conserves charge, but we don’t think that the proton traveled and became the positron, right? So it is not that it has traveled. You are right. I hadn’t thought about that. It’s a good point that it implies it traveled infinitely fast, but that’s not the reason you object to it. Yep?Student: It’s not necessarily simultaneous.Professor Ramamurti Shankar: That is the correct answer. The answer is it is not simultaneous in every frame of reference. You must know from the special theory that if two events are simultaneous in one frame of reference, if you see those same two events in a moving train, or plane, or anything they will not be simultaneous. Therefore, in any other frame of reference, either the charge would have been created first and then after a period of time reappeared somewhere, I mean, destroyed somewhere and appeared after a delay, or the appearance could take place before the destruction, so suddenly you’ve got two charges. So conservation of charge, which is conserved non-locally, cannot have a significance except in one frame of reference, but if you believe that all observers are equivalent and you want to write down laws that make sense for everybody it can only be local. So electrical charge is conserved and it is local, locally conserved. In other words, stuff doesn’t just disappear. Stuff just moves around. You can keep track of it, and if you add it up you get the same number.The second part of q, which is not necessary for any of these older phenomena, is that q is quantized. That means the electrical charge that we run into does not take a continuum of possible values. For example, the length of any object, you might think at least in classical mechanics, is any number you like. It’s a continuous variable, but electric charge is not continuous. As far as we can tell, all the charges we have ever seen are all multiples of a certain basic unit of charge, which turns out to be 1.6 times 10 to the -19 coulombs. Every charge is either that or some multiple of it. Multiple could be plus or minus multiple. So charge is granular, not continuous.Okay, so I’m going to give you a little more knowledge we have had since the time of Coulomb that sort or explains these things. I mean, what’s really going on microscopically? We don’t have to pretend we don’t know. We do, so we might as well use that information from now on. What we do know is that everything is made up of atoms, and that if you look into the atom it’s got a nucleus, a lot of guys sitting here. Some are called protons and some are called neutrons, and then there are some guys running around called electrons. Of course we will see at the end of the semester that this picture is wrong, but it is good enough for this purpose. It’s certainly true that there are charges in an atom which are near the center and other light charges which are near the periphery, are outside. All things carrying electric charge in our world in daily life are either protons or electrons. You can produce strange particles in an accelerator. They would also carry some charge which would in fact be a multiple of this charge, but they don’t live very long. So the stable things that you and I are made of and just about everything in this room is made of, is made up of protons, neutrons and electrons. The charge of the neutron, as you can guess, is 0. The charge of the electron, by some strange convention, was given this minus sign by Franklin. And the charge of the proton is plus 1.6 times into -19 coulombs.There are a lot of amazing things I find here. I don’t know if you’ve thought about it. The first interesting thing is that every electron anywhere in the universe has exactly the same charge. It also has exactly the same mass. Now, you might say, “Look, that’s a tautology,” because if it wasn’t the same charge and if it wasn’t the same mass you would call it something else. But what makes it a non-empty statement is that there are many, many, many, many electrons which are absolutely identical. Look, you try to manufacture two cars. The chance that they’re identical is 0, right? I got one of those cars so I know that. It doesn’t work. It’s supposed to. So despite all the best efforts people make, things are not identical.But at the microscopic level of electrons and protons, every proton anywhere in the universe is identical. And they can be manufactured in a collision in another part of the universe. This can be manufactured in a collision in Geneva, the stuff that comes out identical. That is a mystery, at least in classical mechanics it’s a mystery. Quantum Field Theory gives you an answer to at least why all electrons are identical, and why all protons are identical. The fact that they’re absolutely identical particles is very, very important. It also makes your life easy, because if every particle was different from every other particle, you cannot make any predictions. We know that the hydrogen atom on a receding galaxy is identical to the hydrogen atom on the Earth. That’s why when the radiation coming from the atom has a shifted wavelength of frequency, we attributed to the motion of the galaxy. From the Doppler Shift we find out its speed. But another explanation could be, well, that’s a different hydrogen atom. Maybe that’s why the answer’s different. But we all believe it’s the same hydrogen atom, but it’s moving away from us.Therefore, one of the remarkable things is that all electrons and all protons are equal, but a really big mystery is why is the charge of the electron exactly equal and opposite the charge of the proton. They are not the same particle. Their masses are different. Their other interactions are different. But in terms of electrical charge these two numbers are absolutely equal as far as anybody knows. That’s another mystery. Two different particles, not related by any manifest family relationship, have the same charge, except in sign. And there are theories called Grand Unified Theories which try to explain this, but certainly not part of any standard established theory, but it’s key to everything we see in daily life because that’s what makes the atom electrically neutral.Okay, now we can understand the quantization of charge, because charge is carried by these guys and these guys are either there or not there, so you can only have so many electrons. We cannot have a part of an electron, or part of a proton. Now, let’s try to understand all these experiments in terms of what we know. First of all, when you take this piece of glass, and you rub it, the atoms in glass are neutral. They’ve got equal number of protons and electrons, but when you rub it, the glass atom loses some electrons to whatever you rubbed it on. Therefore, it becomes positively charged, because some negative has been taken out. In the case of the rubber stick, it gains the electrons and whatever animal you rubbed it on, it loses the electrons. So actually real charge transfer takes place only through electrons. Protons carry charge, but you are never going to rip a proton out unless you use an accelerator. It’s really deeply bound to the nucleus. Electrons are the ones who do all the business of electricity in daily life. The current flowing in the wire, in the circuit, it’s all the motion of electrons. So from this and Coulomb’s Law, can you understand the attraction between these two? How many people think you can, from Coulomb’s Law, understand the attraction between these two rods? Nobody thinks you can? Well, why do you think you cannot? You know why?Student: Because they’re not point charges?Professor Ramamurti Shankar: Okay, any other reason why Coulomb’s Law is not enough? Well, how will we apply Coulomb’s Law to understand the attraction between these two rods? What will you have to do?Student: You’d have to apply it to F = ma.Professor Ramamurti Shankar: No. Once you got the F, the a will follow, but can you compute the force between two rods? One of them has got a lot of positive charge. One of them has a lot of negative charge given Coulomb’s Law. Yes?Student: You don’t know the exact quantities of the charges.Professor Ramamurti Shankar: Pardon me?Student: You don’t know the exact quantities of the charges.Professor Ramamurti Shankar: Suppose I tell you. I tell you how many charges there are. Yes?Student: You don’t which direction the attraction is.Professor Ramamurti Shankar: No, we do know, because the plus and minus will be drawn towards each other. Okay, I’ll tell you what it is. It’s an assumption we all make, but you’re not really supposed to make it. It’s not a consequence of any logic. Coulomb’s Law talks about two charges, two point charges. What if there are three charges in the universe? What is the force this one will experience due to these two? This is q1. This is q2. This is q3. Coulomb’s Law doesn’t tell you that. It tells you only two at a time, but we make an extra assumption called superposition which says that if you want the force on 3 (should read 1), when there is q1 and q2, you find the force due to q2 and you find the force due to q3 and you add them up. The fact that you can add these two vectors is not a logical requirement. In fact, it’s not even true at an extremely accurate level that the force between two charges is not affected by the presence of a third one. But it’s an excellent approximation, but you must realize it is something you’ve got to find to be true experimentally. It’s not something you can say is logical consequence. Logically there is no reason why the interaction between two entities should not be affected by the presence of a third one. But it seems to be a very good approximation for what we do, and that’s the reason why eventually we can find the force between an extended object, another extended object by looking at the force on everyone of these due to everyone of those and adding all the vectors.Okay, so superposition plus Coulomb’s Law is what you need. Then you can certainly understand the attraction. How about the comb and the piece of paper? That’s a very interesting example and it’s connected to this one. See, the piece of paper is electrically neutral. So let me do paper and comb instead of this one. It’s got the same model. Here’s the piece of paper. Here’s the comb. The comb is positively charged. The paper is neutral. So anyway, there’s nothing here to be attracted to this one, but if you bring it close enough, there are equal amount of positive and negative charges, but what will happen is the negative charges will migrate near these positive charges from the other end, leaving positive charges in the back, so that the system will separate into a little bit of negative closer to the positive, and the leftover positive will be further away. Therefore, even though it’s neutral the attraction of plus for this minus is stronger than the repulsion of this plus with this plus. That’s called polarization.So polarization is when charge separates. Some materials cannot be polarized, in which case no matter how much you do this with a comb it won’t work. Some materials can be polarized. The piece of paper is an example of what can be polarized. We can understand that too. And in this example, if you bring a lot of plus charges here, and you look at what’s going on here, the minus guys here will sit here and the plus will be left over in the back, and then this attraction between plus and minus is bigger than this repulsion, so it will be attracted to it. But once it touches it, this rod touches that, then what you have is a lot of plus charges here. They repel each other. They want to get out. Previously they couldn’t get out. They were stuck on the rod, but now that you’ve made contact, some of them will jump to that one. Then when you separate them, you will have a ball with some plus charges, and you will have a rod with more plus charges, and they will repel each other. And finally I said if you take two of these spheres, suppose one was positively charged, one was negatively charged, they’re attracting each other. If you connect them with a nylon wire or a wooden stick nothing happens, but if you connect them with an electrical wire, what happens is that the extra negative charges here will go to that side, and then when you are done they will both become electrically neutral.Okay, so that’s why. So the point of this one is: electric charges can flow through some materials, but not other materials. If it can flow through some materials, it’s called a conductor. If it cannot flow through them, it’s called an insulator. So real life you’ve got both. So when you’re changing the light bulb, if you don’t want to get an electric shock you’re supposed to stand on a piece of wood before you stick your finger in, unless you’ve got other intentions. Then, you will find that you don’t get the shock because the wood doesn’t conduct electricity. But if you stand on a metallic stool, on a metallic floor and put your hand in the socket, you’ll be part of an electrical circuit. The human body is a good conductor of electricity, but what saves you is that it cannot go from your feet to the floor. Now, there are also semiconductors, which are somewhere in between, but in our course either we’ll talk about insulators, which don’t conduct electricity, and perfect conductors, which conduct electricity.Okay, so a summary of what I’ve said so far is that there’s a new force in nature. To be part of that game you have to have charge. If you have no charge, you cannot play that game. Like neutrons cannot play this game. Nothing’s attracted or repelled by neutrons and neutrons cannot attract or repel anything. So you’ve got to have electric charge. It happens to be measured in coulombs. So let me ask you another question. Suppose I tell you, here is Coulombs Law. Let me just write the number 1 over 4Πε0. How are we going to test that this law is correct? Okay, I’m giving you a bonus. You don’t have to discover the law. I’m giving you the law. All you have to do is to verify it, and don’t use any other definitions other than this law itself. How will you know it depends on q1 and q2 in this fashion? How will you know it depends on r in that fashion? That’s what I’m asking you. Can anybody think of some setup, some experiment you will do? Let me ask an easier question. How will you know it goes like 1 over r2? Yep?Student: Vary the distance between them, and show that the force falls off.Professor Ramamurti Shankar: Well, you’re right that if you vary the distance between them and show the force falls like that, but how do you know what the force is? Yes?Student: Could you use a spring here?Professor Ramamurti Shankar: What was your plan?Student: Observe acceleration.Professor Ramamurti Shankar: You are right. Both of you are right. You can maybe hold this guy fixed, and let this go, and see how it accelerates. And if you knew the mass of this guy then you know the force. Then you can vary the distance to another distance, maybe half the distance. At half the distance if you get four times the force you verified 1 over r2 law. The other one is with the spring. You can take a spring. Say maybe there are two metals, uncharged objects, then you dump some charge on this and some charge on that, and then the spring will expand, and you can see what force the spring expands, exerts, and see if it is proportional to 1 over r2. That’s how Newton deduced the 1 over r2 force law. He found the acceleration of the apple is 3,600 times the acceleration of the moon towards the earth, and the moon was 60 times further than the apple, and 60 squared is 3,600. That’s how he found 1 over r2. Now, he was very lucky. It could have been 1 over r to the 2.110 or 1.96, but it happens to be exactly 1 over r2. Anyway, that’s how we can find even if it’s not 1 over r2. If it’s 1 over r3, or 1 over r4, whatever it is you can find by taking two charges.See, we don’t have to know what q1 and q2 are. That’s what I’m trying to emphasize here. If all you’re trying to see is does it vary like 1 over r2, keep everything the same except r. Double the r and see what happens. And best way is what you said. Watch the acceleration, and if it falls to one fourth of the value for doubling the distance, it is 1 over r2. All right, suppose I got 1 over r2. I want to know it depends on the charges as the first power of q1 and the first power of q2. So how should we do that? And don’t say put 10 electrons once and then 20 electrons because you cannot see electrons that well. In the old days people did not even know about electrons, and yet they managed to test this. So how will you vary the charge in a known way? Yep?Student: You could have many identical spheres, and maybe keep touching them to each other.Professor Ramamurti Shankar: Ah! Okay, many identical spheres.Student: And then put charge on one and then touch it to the second one and you’ll get half as much.Professor Ramamurti Shankar: Very good. Let me repeat what she said. First you take many identical spheres. Well, I not going to even try to draw identical spheres because I haven’t learned how to draw spheres, but let’s imagine you’ve got a whole bunch of these guys. You put some charge on this. You don’t know what it is, okay? We don’t know what q is. We’re trying to find out. You don’t have to know what q is. So let this be one of the objects. That’s my q. For the other object, keep a fixed-object containing some other q. This has got charge q. Don’t vary the r. Question is, can you change q to q/2, and her answer was: if it’s got some charge, maybe a plus, bring it in contact with the second identical sphere. If it really is identical, you have to agree that when you separate them they must exactly have half each. That’s a symmetry argument. Because for any reason you give me for why one of them should have more, I will tell you why the other one should have more. You cannot, so they will split it evenly and therefore charge will split evenly to q/2 here and q/2 here. Then you can take this and put it there — you’ve got q/2. Then you can do other combinations. For example, you can take this q/2 and connect it to the ground so it becomes neutral. So this has got 0 again. You can touch that with the q/2 and separate them. Then each will have q/4. So in this way you can vary the charge in a known way, maybe half of it, double it. I give you some homework problem where you want to get 5/16 of a coulomb. By enough spheres you can do that.Again, what I want you to notice is that you did not know what q was, but all you knew is that q went to q/2 when you brought two identical spheres and separated them. That’s how we can find that it depends linearly on q1. Of course, it also depends linearly on q2 because it’s up to you to decide who you want to call q1, and who you want to call q2. Okay, so I want you people to understand all the time that you should be able to tell me how you measure anything, okay? That’s very, very important. That’s why you should think about it. If you think in those terms you’ll also find you’re doing all the problems very well. If you’re thinking of pushing symbols and canceling factors of Π you won’t get the feeling for what’s happening. So everything you write down you should be able to measure. If you say, “Oh, I want to measure the force,” you’ve got to be sure how you’ll measure it, and one way is like you said, find m times a. If you knew the m you can measure the force. For everything make sure you can measure it. If I give you a sphere charged with something, then of course we’ve got to decide. Suppose I give you a sphere. It’s got some charge, and I want you to find how much charge is on that sphere. This time I want you to tell me how many coulombs there are. What will you do? What process will you use? Well, then you have a problem because you are not able to figure out, but if I tell you here’s an object, it is 3 meters long, you can test it because you’ll go and bring the meter stick from the Bureau of Standards and measure it three times. I’m asking you, if I give you a certain charge and say how much charge is there, by what process can we calibrate the charges? Yep?Student: Put it in the vicinity of a reference charge and then measure the acceleration.Professor Ramamurti Shankar: That’s correct. If you knew one standard charge, somehow or other we knew its value, then bring the unknown one next to it, put it at a known distance, right? You know the r. You know the 4Π. You know the ε0. You find the force, you can find this charge. So all we need to know is how to get a reference charge, right? So how do I know something has a coulomb? How do I get 1 coulomb of charge just to be sure? You know what you could do, because you haven’t defined yet the reference, so you should think about how will I get a coulomb charge, or any other charge? So I could take these two spheres that she talked about, each with the same charge q. We don’t know what it is. I put them at 1 meter distance and I measure the force, namely how hard should I hold one from running away to the other one. Once I got the force, the only thing unknown in the equation is q times q. I know r. I know 1 over 4Πε0. I can get q. So every time you write something think about how you’ll measure it, because in that process you’re learning how the physics is done. If you try to avoid that you’ll be just juggling equations, and that doesn’t work for you and that doesn’t work for me. Anybody who wants to do good physics should be constantly paying attention to physical phenomena, and not to the symbols that stand for physical objects.All right, so the final thing I want to do in this connection is to give this number I mentioned, Fgravity over Felectric. I said gravity is 10 to the -40 times weaker. Well, you have to precise on how you got the number. See, it’s not like selling toothpaste where you can say it is 7.2 times whiter. I don’t know how those guys measure whiteness in a unit with two decimal places, but that’s a different game. It’s not subject to any rules, but here you have to say how you got the number. In what context did you make the comparison? It turns out the answer does depend on what you choose. There’ll be some variations, but those tiny variations are swamped by this enormous ratio I would get. So what you could do is take any two bodies, and find the ratio of gravity to electric force. One option is to take two elementary particles, whichever two you like. So I will take an electron and a proton, but you can take an electron and a positron, or a proton and a proton. It doesn’t matter.These two guys attract each other gravitationally and electrically. So I will write the force of gravitation, which is G, mass of the proton, mass of the electron, over r2 divided by qelectron, qproton over 4Πε0 times 1 over r2. Notice in this experiment, in this calculation, r2 does not matter, so you don’t have to decide how far you want to keep them, because they both go like 1 over r2 ,so you can pick any r. So whatever you pick is going to cancel and you will be left with this number. A q1, q2 and the 1 over 4Πε0 is 9 times 10 to the 9th. So now we put in some numbers. So G is 10 to the -11 with some pre-factors, maybe 6 in this case. I’m not going to worry about pre-factors. But the mass of the proton is 10 to the -27 kilograms, the mass of the electron 10 to -30 kilograms. So don’t say how come they all have these nice round numbers. They are not. There are factors like 1 and 2. I’m not putting them because I’m just counting powers of 10. q1 is 1.6 times 10 to the -19, so two of those q’s is 10 to the -38. Then 9 times 10 to the 9th is roughly 10 to the 10th. If you do all of that you will find this is 10 to the -40, if it is some typical situation that you took, and you found this ratio of forces. If there are two elementary particles, which are like the building blocks of matter, and you brought them to any distance you like you compare the electric attraction to the gravitational attraction.So one question is: if gravity is so weak, how did anyone discover the force of gravity? If all you had was electrons and protons, you’d have to measure the force between them. Suppose you knew only about electricity, didn’t know about gravitation. One way to find there is an extra force is to measure the force to an accuracy good to 40 decimal places, and in the 40th decimal place you find something is wrong. You fiddle around and figure out the correction comes from m1m2 over r2, but that’s not how it was done, right? You guys know that. So how did anyone discover the force of gravity when it’s overwhelmed? Yes?Student: Most things are neutral?Professor Ramamurti Shankar: Yes. Most things are electrically neutral. In other words, electric force, even though it’s very strong, comes with opposite charges. It can occur with a plus sign or with a minus sign. Therefore, if you take the planet Earth, it’s got lots and lots of charges in every atom, but every atom is neutral. You’ve got the moon, ditto, lots and lots of atoms, but they’re all neutral. But the mass of the electron does not cancel the mass of the proton. So mass can never be hidden, whereas charge can be hidden. Mass never cancels. That’s the reason why, in spite of the incredible amount of electrical forces they’re potentially capable of exerting, they present to each other neutral entities. Therefore, this remaining force which is not shielded is what you see, and has a dramatic role in the structure of the universe, force of gravity. But in most cosmological calculations you can forget mainly the electric force. It’s all gravitational force. That’s because electricity can be neutralized. So you cannot hide gravity. Everything has mass. Even photons which have no mass have energy. They’re also attracted by gravitation.So gravity cannot be hidden, and that’s the origin of something called dark matter. So how many of you guys heard about dark matter? Okay? Anyone want to volunteer? Someone whose name begins with T, anybody’s name begins with T and also knows the answer to this? The trouble is, you people are plagued with one quality which is not good for being in physics, namely you’re modest. So you don’t want to tell me the answer. So I have to give an excuse for whoever gives the answer. If your seat has a number 142, anybody in seat 142? Maybe they’re not even numbered. Look, anybody with a red piece of clothing knows the answer to this — go ahead. Yes?Student: Professor Ramamurti Shankar: Pardon me?Student: Professor Ramamurti Shankar: Right. Basically there’s no way you can see it, and there’s dark matter right in this room, okay? And there’s dark matter everywhere, but the reason, the way people found out there is dark matter, do you know how that was determined? Yep?Student: The rotation of galaxies didn’t line up with the matter that was visible, so…Professor Ramamurti Shankar: So yes. Maybe one example I can talk is about our own galaxy. So here’s our visible galaxy, okay, the old spiral. Now, if something is orbiting this galaxy just by using Newtonian gravity, by knowing the velocity of the object as it goes around, you can calculate how much mass is enclosed by the orbit. That’s a property of gravitation — from the orbit, you can find out how much mass is enclosed. So what you will find is, if you found something orbiting the center of the galaxy at that radius, you’ll enclose some mass. If you take objects at bigger and bigger radius, you’ll enclose more and more mass, until you find orbits as big as the galaxy. Then the mass enclosed as a function of radius should come and stop, because after that the orbit’s getting bigger, but not enclosing any more mass. But what people found, that even after you cross the nominal size of the galaxy, you still keep picking up mass, and that is the dark matter halo of our galaxy. So it’s dark to everything, but you cannot escape gravity. That’s what I meant to say. You cannot avoid gravitational force.So people are trying to find dark matter. People at Yale are trying to find dark matter. The thing is, you don’t know exactly what it is. It’s not any of the usual suspects, because then they would have interacted very strongly. So you’re trying to find something not knowing exactly what it is. And you’ve got to build detectors that will detect something. And you go through it everyday in your lab, and you’re hoping that one of these dark matter particles will collide with the stuff in your detector, and trigger a reaction. Of course there will be lots of reactions everyday, but most of them are due to other things. That’s called background. You’ve got to throw the background out, and whatever is left has got to be due to dark matter. And again, how do you know it’s dark matter? How do you know it’s not something else? Well you can see that if you’re drifting through dark matter in a moving Earth, you will be running into more of them in the direction of motion and less in the other direction, because you’re running into the wind. So by looking at the direction dependence, you can try to see if it’s dark matter. Anyway, dark matter was discovered by simple Newtonian gravitation. The particles that form dark matter are very interesting to particle physicists. There are many candidates in particle theory, but the origin of the discrepancy came from just doing Newtonian gravity.All right, the final thing today before we break is that there’s one variation of Coulomb’s Law. By the way, I do not know your mathematical training and how much math you know, so you have to be on the lookout, say, if I write something that looks very alien to you, you’ve got to go take care of that, in particular, how to do integrals in maybe more than one dimension. Anyway, what I wanted to discuss today is the following: we know how to do Coulomb’s Law due to any number of point charges. So if you put another charge q here you want the force on this guy due to all these. You draw those lines, you take the 1 over r2 due to that, 1 over r2 due to that, add all the vectors. That’s very simple. But we will also take problems where the charges are continuous. So here’s an example. Here’s a ring of charge. The ring has some radius. You pick your radius r, and the charge on it is continuous. It’s not discrete, or it could be in real life everything is discrete, but to a coarse observer it will look like it’s continuous. So we can draw some pictures here, charges all over the ring, and λ is the number of coulombs per meter. Let me see, if you snipped one meter of the wire it’ll have λ coulombs in it. And you want to find the electric force on some other charge q due to this wire.So you cannot do a sum. And you have to do an integral. That’s what I’m driving at, and I’m going to do one integral, then we’ll do more complicated ones later. So I want to find the force on a charge q here. So what I will do is, I will divide this into segments each of length, say dl. Then I will find the force of the charge here, dF. I will add the forces due to all the segments. The force of this segment will be the charge — this segment is so small, you can treat it as a point charge, and the amount of charge here is λ times dl. That’s the q1. The q2 is the q I put there. Then there’s the 4Πε0, r2, r2 will be this distance z times this radius r will be — maybe I shouldn’t call it r. Let me call it capital R, and it’s R2 plus z2. That’s the distance. But now that force is a vector that’s pointing in that direction, but I know that the total force is going to point in this direction because for every guy I find in this side I can find one in the opposite direction pointing that way. So they will always cancel horizontally.The only remaining force will be in the z direction. So I’m going to keep only the component of the force in the z direction. I denote it by dF in the z direction. For that, you have to take this force and multiply by cosine of that θ. I hope you know how to find the component of a force in a direction. It’s the cosine of the angle between them. That angle is equal to this angle, and cosine of this is z divided by R2 plus z2 on the root. That is the dF due to this segment, and the total force in the z direction is integral of this, and what that integrate. λ, q, all these are constant, R, z, everything is a constant. You have to add all the dl’s, if you add all the dl’s you will get the circumference. In other words, this is going to be λqz divided by 4Πε0R2 plus z2 to the 3/2 integral of dl. Integral of dl is just 2ΠR. In other words, every one of them is making an equal contribution, so the integrand doesn’t depend on where you are in the circle, so you’re just measuring the length of the circle. That’s the answer. The force looks like λ times 2ΠR, what is that? λ is the charge per unit length. That, times the length of the loop, is the charge on the loop. It’s the charge you’re putting there divided by 4Πε0 divided by R2 plus z2 to the 3/2. That’s an example of calculating the force which will be in this direction. Now, once you’ve done this calculation you may think maybe I missed a factor of Π or factor of e, something. Can you think of a way to test this? What test would you like to apply to this result? Yep?Student: Put the z equal to 0 and have it in the middle. There should be no forces on it.Professor Ramamurti Shankar: Very good. What he said is, if you pick z equal to 0 you’re sitting in the middle of the circle, and you’re getting pushed equally from all sides, and you better not have a force, and that’s certainly correct. This vanishes when z goes to 0. Anything else? Any other test? Yep?Student: You could put it underneath by negative z. The force should be negative.Professor Ramamurti Shankar: Yes, it will point down and be negative. That’s correct, but how about the magnitude of the force itself, rather than just the direction? Yep?Student: If you go infinitely far away it should look like a point charge.Professor Ramamurti Shankar: Yes. If you go very, very far, someone’s holding a loop, you cannot see that it’s even a loop. It’s some tiny spec, and it should produce the field. So what field should it produce? It should produce the coulomb force q1q2, or 4Πε0 times distance squared. And when z is much, much, much bigger than R, this is one kilometer, this is two inches. You forget this. You get z2 to the 3/2 is then z cubed. That means the whole thing here reduces to 1 over z2 and it looks like the force between two point charges. So I would ask you whenever you do a calculation to test your result.Okay, before going I’ve got to tell you something about those who come late. I realize that you guys come from near and far, so when you come late let me give you my preference for doors, okay? Door number one is that one. That’s the least problematic. Door number two is this one, because in the beginning of the lecture I’m usually on that side of the board, so you guys can come in. Door number three is that one where Jude is taking the picture, but do not stand in front of the camera and contemplate your future. If you do I will make sure you don’t have a future, okay? So don’t do that. If you come fashionably late, never come through that door, maybe this one. In fact if you come through that door because I have reached this side of the board, you are very, very late, so I think you should take the day off and start fresh next time, all right? Okay, thank you.