Professor Douglas W. Rae: I’m going to use today to actually cover some introductory material. We will use most of the fifty minutes. The last part of today’s lecture will describe the course, its requirements, and so forth. So let’s begin. Capitalism — we’re going to break the subject today into three headings. Capital, capitalism, and course, three “Cs” if you will. The — I’ve chosen, and I usually do this, I’ve chosen one segment of the economy as the theme for the day, and today that segment is revealed in this slide. Calhoun Athletics XXL, can you interpret the slide?Student: Green technology.Professor Douglas W. Rae: Okay what in particular?Student: Professor Douglas W. Rae: Okay, how about Varic bottled water?Student: Like the crop circles?Professor Douglas W. Rae: Okay, they are indeed crop circles. Score one for MBAs. They are crop circles, and all of us who travel from east to west across the country have seen them, but we haven’t seen them quite in this density because this photograph is taken from space, it’s a NASA image, and it’s an extraordinarily elegant display of something very simple. Now why would center pivot agriculture interest us from the point of view of capitalism? The mis-formatted slide here says capital. This is a definition that comes down to us through the Oxford English Dictionary from the early seventeenth century and let me read it in full and then we’ll boil it down to more manageable terms: “Capital is the accumulated wealth of an individual, company, or community used as a fund to carry on fresh production; wealth in any form used to help in producing more wealth.” And there’s a shift between those two meanings. The first is a very broad understanding of capital. The second is very close to the way you would have to think about capital in connection with an economic system called capitalism.So, let’s start with the broader usage, “Capital is accumulated wealth used as a fund in carrying on fresh production.” That’s a very broad idea. It is one which arguably — in fact I think without much argument, goes back 10,000 years to the establishment of agricultural society, and very possibly another 100,000 or 120,000 years to organized hunter gatherers using weapons and tools. Does this qualify? Is that not capital? What do you think? Second row purple —Student: Professor Douglas W. Rae: It is capital. Sorry, excuse me, can you hand her this?Student: Professor Douglas W. Rae: Okay, so the nuts buried in the forest floor are accumulated wealth, so it meets that test. Does it meet the next test? You need the mic a little closer to your mouth.Student: Professor Douglas W. Rae: Okay so what is the squirrel producing with that nut?Student: Nothing material.Professor Douglas W. Rae: He’s producing squirrel, and that’s not really what we mean. Hand the mic to somebody else and we’ll just — it’s the hot potato. Just pass it around and wherever it is when I ask a question that’s your turn. That’ll be good. The nest is producing nestlings, and it’s a little closer to what we mean. The beaver dam producing a working environment for beavers to carry out their business; it’s closer. Infrastructure if you will. The honeycomb that bees use. This one is actually the one that is closest intuitively to capital. Right? The accumulated wealth is the energy and silk required to weave the nest or weave the web, and the web is indeed an instrument for the work of capturing prey, but there’s no external product beyond it, so even that is not quite what we have in mind. Now how about seed? The seeds used in agriculture. Where’s the — where’s the mic right now? Fess up. Come on in guys. No, no, no. You’re not passing it off now. Okay, so do you reckon that seeds like this constitute capital?Student: Okay, I don’t really think so, no.Professor Douglas W. Rae: Okay and why not?Student: Well, I guess that a seed produces a plant, but it doesn’t really — well I guess yeah, maybe the seed produces a plant, and then the plant produces more seeds and it sort of keeps generating more and more seeds.Professor Douglas W. Rae: Is that capital?Student: I mean it doesn’t look like it to me.Professor Douglas W. Rae: Why not? Be exact.Student: Well I guess that capital is sort of a never-ending way of accumulating more wealth.Professor Douglas W. Rae: Does it have to go on forever? Don’t capitalists fail?Student: Yeah capitalists fail, but good capitalists don’t.Professor Douglas W. Rae: Take Mory’s, it’s a pretty good example. It’s a really good example, actually. Okay, mic please. In this bucket I’ve got two kilograms of seed. Would anybody say that it isn’t enough to count as capital? If — is one seed, is that enough to make it capital?Student: What kind of seeds?Professor Douglas W. Rae: It’s —Student: I said what kind of seed is it?Professor Douglas W. Rae: Okay, it is for growing safflower. If you elicit information from me you’ve got to give me something back.Student: I think seeds in any quantity can be capital because each — once you plant it and if there isn’t successful pollination —Professor Douglas W. Rae: Is the voice loud enough here?Student: You can always use plants to produce more seed. In fact, that’s what a lot of farms do and that’s what a lot of farms get in trouble for because other companies want to control those seeds.Professor Douglas W. Rae: Okay, so there’s a patent violation issue if I use hybrid seed to generate more hybrid seed? There may be, there’s an argument there. Okay, so quantity doesn’t matter at all? Yes.Student: I’d say quantity matters if you’re a subsistence farmer because if you just have enough seed to feed yourself, that’s not capital that’s just keeping you alive, you’re not producing any further wealth from it.Professor Douglas W. Rae: Okay and if I gave you just this much seed?Student: Well if I’m not a farmer, if I have some other means of supporting myself that could be capital for a side business but that wouldn’t be for a subsistence farmer.Professor Douglas W. Rae: You think it’s really worth having a business over twenty-six safflower seeds?Student: Well no.Professor Douglas W. Rae: No, I don’t think so either. What I’m driving at here is the notion of minimum efficient scale. Capital gets — a resource gets to be capital only when it’s aggregated to a scale where it can be effectively enough deployed to compete in an actual economy. Now let’s take — that’s too big a note, let’s take a dollar. Have I just given you capital or not?Student: Technically yes, but probably that wouldn’t allow me to set up a budding business over here.Professor Douglas W. Rae: Okay, how might it become a piece of capital?Student: Well if somebody else gives me a dollar or more.Professor Douglas W. Rae: Two dollars is enough for you to call it capital?Student: No, but if I have more investors and they will be giving more than a dollar.Professor Douglas W. Rae: Okay, so you need some aggregation or agglomeration. How do we aggregate capital in an actual economy?Student: IPOs.Professor Douglas W. Rae: IPOs are a big way to do it. In general, the joint stock corporation is a way to do it. How do banks aggregate capital?Student: Deposits.Professor Douglas W. Rae: Thousands of little deposits make big funds. Okay, so we’re getting there with capital and what I want to do now is continue the agricultural theme and see if we can relate what we’re talking about to the generation of actual wealth in society. This is called a seed drill. It is a way of planting millions of seeds in a very systematic, precise, and cost effective way. One characteristic feature of how capital works is combining different factors in the production of the same thing in an extremely intelligent way. A way that represents the accumulated experience of society and when you do it well you succeed, and when you do it poorly you fail. You can actually fail even when you do it well, but you’re very unlikely to succeed when you do it poorly. Now here I want to compare two very similar technologies, this is a peasant farming in Tibet and the mode of power here is a pair of yaks, and this is a John Deere tractor and the spectacular difference between these two things is obvious to us all. It is that one of them is — constitutes a large investment of capital. In the case of that tractor and the gear with it well over $100,000 must be invested. The yaks, well I don’t know what yaks cost in Tibet, but less.We would say that the John Deere photograph represents something that’s capital intensive and the yak photograph represents something which is labor intensive. We would expect a much higher return in food generated per hour of labor invested from the highly mechanized capital intensive story. In the history of the world in the last thousand years is essentially the history of substitution of the right hand picture for the left hand; of capital intensive, highly mechanized means of production in the place of labor intensive, low capitalization means of production. Another comparison, the capital intensivity here, the ratio of that watering cans capital cost to the center pivot that might be as much as 500 meters long would be measured in the thousands to one, the tens of thousands, the hundreds of thousands probably; enormous difference in the level of investment.Also those of you who are interested in the environment, and all of us should be, there is a huge difference in environmental impact. The labor intensive agriculture essentially leaves the environment unchanged, whereas, this kind of agriculture practiced in — it’s now a world — center pivot irrigation is a worldwide technology. And in many places it draws so much water so fast, and so much water is lost to evaporation, that the underlying aquifer is rapidly being depleted. Here are two center pivot photographs, and they too differ in capitalization. The one on the left is from Egypt, the one on the right is from Iowa, and the difference between them in the cost of the land would be dramatic. The market price of highly productive loam soil in one of the three or four richest agricultural zones in the world is much higher than in the margin of the world’s largest desert. Here’s another — I kind of got carried away with center pivot agriculture.Here’s another slide of the same kind from the same source, and this is in Southern France. Who’s been to Southern France? Pretty great isn’t it? I have many reservations about French politics but Southern France is one of the nicest places I’ve ever been, and this summer — we’ll meet a guy here in a month named Paolo Zannoni, who is a robber baron Goldman Sachs partner, and he just built a villa overlooking Cannes in Southern France, and I had to be taken away by security. What’s striking about this photograph in comparison with the others — what’s the dramatic difference between this one and the Egyptian one, and the Iowa one? Purple? That’s not what I’m fishing for guys.Student: There’s other things in the middle.Professor Douglas W. Rae: Okay you got to talk really — where’s — do I have the mic? Here it is. Would you please pass this over to him?Student: There’s other things in the middle of the green and purple circles.Professor Douglas W. Rae: Push the on button and it’ll be on.Student: Alright, there’s other things in the middle of the green and purple circles.Professor Douglas W. Rae: Okay, and what are the other things?Student: I can’t tell if they’re houses or —Professor Douglas W. Rae: Well what are all these little polygons? Look at the right margin, for example. They are — take a guess, they’re not soccer fields. Who wants to take a guess at this? Yes.Student: Pasture.Professor Douglas W. Rae: Pasture? Okay they might be pasture. What they are more generally — you have the — we’ll get better at this microphone thing as we go. What they are is very small farms. They’re farms where the leaps and bounds trace back perhaps 800, 1,000, 1,200 years. They were farms which worked economically when the world was less developed in capital intensive agriculture, but they have been rendered marginal by the transformation of world agriculture. Now the question for you — are you ready for a policy question? Okay, your name is now Sarkozy, and the question is, should we increase — let’s suppose that 20% of these farms are failing a year, and we’re already subsidizing them pretty heavily. Should we subsidize them more so that the rate at which they close down is diminished? Mr. Sarkozy?Student: I would say if you really want to effectively decrease the rate at which they’re failing you’d want to encourage consolidation. It looks like the problem here is real fragmentation.Professor Douglas W. Rae: Okay, the problem is fragmentation, that’s a really good start. Now the person immediately to your right is your political consultant, and she’s going to tell you whether what you just said is going to wash in Lyon or not. How’s the Sarkozy consolidation program, how’s that going to play?Student: Can you repeat the question?Professor Douglas W. Rae: Okay, Sarkozy just said these little fragments of land are an extremely inefficient way to do agriculture. He/she was right on that point. She goes on to say that we should try to capture the scale economies of big fields by consolidating agriculture. Now you are a public official subject to election. What — how is that going to read for you, that statement that we should announce the Sarkozy Agricultural Consolidation Plan?Student: I don’t think that the public would like it, like the small farmers.Professor Douglas W. Rae: The small farmers would hate it, and do the small farmers play a special role in the life and imagination of France?Student: Yes.Professor Douglas W. Rae: Yes. Okay so probably it won’t happen and France — this is a characteristic fact about all the capitalist democracies is that pressure groups play an enormously important role in actual policy. The one book, which is available for purchase at Labyrinth, but which isn’t actually required, is Christopher Buckley’s Thank You For Smoking. How many of you have read this book?Student: Probably watched the movie.Professor Douglas W. Rae: Pardon?Student: The movie.Professor Douglas W. Rae: Oh, the movie! How many of you have seen the movie? Books! It’s all about the biases of pressure groups and public relations in the capitalist — in the largest capitalist democracy, which is our own. I just couldn’t resist throwing this one in, this is the Libyan Desert and center pivot agriculture plus maybe something else that uncles — observers from the sky found interesting. Okay so a general theme here, Strategy A / Strategy B. Strategy A is labor intensive production. Strategy B is capital intensive production. The single biggest story, and I’m repeating myself here because it’s such a big point, in recent world history is the substitution of Strategy B for Strategy A, and that happening on an extremely uneven basis. It’s happening in a big way and fast some places, and in a little way and slow other places, and that generates an enormous vertical dimension to the world. There are income ratios between households measured in the millions, millions to one, and that provides some of the interest in the functioning of capitalism which brings us to the subject.Now comparing labor intensive, the red arrow, with capital intensive, the blue arrow, we have here a very simple production function where labor expended is on the horizontal axis, and units produced is on the vertical. For those of who are actually taking this course, these slides I posted them just before class and so if you — you can just — you don’t have to write this stuff down. If you project differences in rates of return over long periods, here I’ve put 100 production cycles, and one curve is increasing at 1%, the red one, the other is increasing at 4% per cycle, and by the end of the period there is a monstrous difference in the rate at which they are accumulating.In actual fact very small differences, I’ve greatly overstated them in the production function here. The difference between 4% and 3%, or between 2.5% and 1%, are enormously consequential when projected over time. And at a given moment in time, are enormously consequential from a competitive point of view, because if you are not the low cost producer, the low cost producer is in a position where if she has sufficient scale of operation, she can drive you out of business. Now everything we’ve said so far could be true of almost any economic system. I put the grass here to suggest Tang, China. This was one of the great periods in Chinese cultural and economic history, ending more than a thousand years ago. The use of capital, not necessarily in the highly intensive form, but the use of capital in this economic cycle we’re talking about was a perfectly normal practice which the Tang Dynasty would have understood easily. They were, by the way, just as inventive as we have been in the last couple of hundred years. What they didn’t have was the ability to go to scale.Or it could have been as suggested in this Bruegel painting, we could be thinking of Europe in the fifteenth century or the sixteenth century before the capitalist revolution because there was always the reliance on capital. Lower levels of intensivity because there was less capital in total. And it could even have been, we could even be talking about an agricultural cooperative in the Soviet Union, which used capital in the form of tractors and land, and seed, and so on, but used it in a very different way than it is used in market economies.Two: capitalism. Let’s switch now to the lower usage here. It is the use of accumulated wealth to produce more wealth. Marx makes a big point of this wealth, commodity, wealth — WCW — and sees this as pathological, as a distortion of human values. And we’ll talk through Marx in about a week or ten days. The great man — how many of you have read as many as ten pages of Marx’s writing? Where do we read Marx at Yale these days?Student: Philosophy.Professor Douglas W. Rae: Philosophy department. Where else?Student: Sociology.Professor Douglas W. Rae: Directed studies. What is directed studies read of Marx?Student: Professor Douglas W. Rae: “Communist Manifesto”; that’s great, you’re well prepared for this class because we’re going to read it next week. What would you say of Marx as a writer? First of all he wrote in German, but who’s got an editorial opinion about Marx’s writing? Yes.Student: I think —Professor Douglas W. Rae: You’ve got to shout without the mic.Student: A very talented writer.Professor Douglas W. Rae: A very talented writer. I agree; a very smart guy. If you were marking a Marx term paper up, what would you find fault with?Student: A bit long-winded.Professor Douglas W. Rae: Very windy and a little overwrought, right? He really wants to hit you in the face five times with each thought. But what we’ll discover is interesting is that Marx, in the Manifesto, Marx and Engels, look at capitalism in a way very similar to the way we look at it today. They emphasize its enormous productive capacity and they also emphasize that it is always on the edge of being out of control. Capitalism, as a word, comes into the English language in the middle of the 1800s, and it comes in because of Marx and people like Marx. It is a pejorative used to attack the existing economic system. Capitalism is seen not as a highly productive system but as an unjust system, and it’s criticized in other ways which I’ll tick off in a moment. Anybody recognize this fellow? Yes.Student: J.P. Morgan.Professor Douglas W. Rae: It’s J.P. Morgan and does anybody know who took this photograph? That’s a little hard; Steichen. And it’s a very famous photograph. What’s famous about it? What does — what’s striking about this image?Student: His face.Professor Douglas W. Rae: Does he look friendly, warm and fuzzy? No, and he wasn’t. I mean this was a very hard edge guy. What seems to be in his left hand?Student: A chair.Professor Douglas W. Rae: It is a chair — it is the arm of a chair, but the reflection makes it look like he’s holding a dagger. It was no accident. Steichen was not a fan and this has been used — this photograph’s been used thousands of times in a polemical way. Okay, capitalism as seen in the nineteenth century. A disease for which scientific socialism, that’s Marx’s term for Marx, is the cure. Of course there were twenty or thirty other brands of socialism that Marx regarded as unscientific. It is a method by which to steal the labor from the exploited masses. The reasoning, which we’ll review in ten days time, is that capital can never make money except by using either labor now or the accumulated fruit of labor from the past, and if capital ends up with a profit, that profit must be extracted from either living or fossilized labor. This is not a thought which I share.It is a system which undermines traditional society in all its forms, and undermines traditional skill sets, and that’s a perfectly true statement. When it happens it is very coercive. It is indeed a trademark of the way capitalism works. That a skill set which was competitive and au courant in 1980 may not command as much as the minimum wage in 2009. This is the kicker for Marx; it is the claim that capitalism inevitably will destroy itself. It will undermine its own foundations and ultimately disappear. We’ll evaluate that view. This slide has cut off the main part of the — of what’s here so I’ll have to remember it for you. Capitalism is the name given to an economic system by its enemies; point one by its enemies. Point two a system which relies heavily on the private use of capital; heavily on the private use of capital combined with the profit motive founded on self interest or family interest. There are hundreds of variations on the capitalist system, but the essentials are private deployment of capital, open acknowledgement of profit as a motive, and a sympathetic understanding of self or household interest.Another frequent part of the package is a tolerance for innovation. One of the characteristic facts about historical society is a resistance to innovation. And the temptation to resist change is always there. It is absolutely always there and as people grow older they grow more set in their ways and expectations and less tolerant of fresh innovation.This course. We’re going to start with some excerpts from the Wealth Of Nations. It is available on Class V2 posted under resources. How many of you have read at least a chapter of Wealth of Nations? Okay, the rest of you are in for a treat. Smith is not only a great writer but a great thinker. He is a much more complex thinker than we usually imagine him to be. He was not a believer that it’s just fine for the poor to starve in the streets. He actually had very complicated news about that which are broadly analogous to the philosopher John Rawls, and Rawls’ difference principle about what inequalities are justified, namely those which  ultimately in some way to the benefit of the least favored stratum in an economy. The Manifesto, already mentioned, and in both cases we’ll leave out a good bit. Smith is a very old book. I recommend to you the Bantam paperback, $7.95 of Smith because it has wonderful little summaries of each paragraph in italics which allow speed reading, which is actually a very useful thing when a book would take a week to plow through in a careful reading. We’ll focus on just three or four points there, three or four arguments in Smith, but they are really powerful and important readings.The Constitution of Liberty is by F.A. Hayek and we’ll just read two chapters that will be in a packet, which you will get. Hayek is the arch-conservative, a market conservative from whom most of the conservative movement — not not concerned with social authority — but the libertarian side of American conservatism relies primarily on Hayek, actually. Farewell to Alms, this book, by a guy named Gregory Clarke, is a book which says capitalism: more and better; pour it on. As capitalism increases its reach the world will grow wealthier and better. It is a polemical work, written by an economist, and you will find things to argue with even if you more or less agree with him you will find many things to argue with him about and that will be an important book in the course. The Mystery of Capital by Hernando DeSoto is an argument about why the less developed countries in the world are less developed, and the gist of it is that formal and enforceable property rights are a precondition to capital development. It’s a very powerful piece of work. Richard Posner, The Failure of Capitalism, Posner — anybody know who Posner is? Tell us loud and clear.Student: A judge.Professor Douglas W. Rae: He’s a judge and he’s a judge of what persuasion, would you say? He’s a very conservative judge, teaches at The University of Chicago Law School, and he has written a very penetrating analysis of the current crisis. It is — I read maybe 20 books and picked one on this subject, and this is the clearest and most honest, I think, and he doesn’t — he does no ideological distortion here that I can detect. It is just a penetrating and straightforward analysis of what happened, and for that reason very useful. The Bottom Billion by Paul Collier, who is a World Bank economist who teaches at Oxford, and in this maps out a diagnosis and a strategy for using market mechanisms and capital development to alleviate most of the world’s poverty. Finally, The White Tiger, this is fiction, but there are times when fiction is better at describing the real world than nonfiction. This is a brutally penetrating novel written from the point of view of a very poor, very smart, and in many ways flawed young man in South India. It won the Man Booker prize last year for fiction. It is, for our age, it is as good as Dickens and Zola were for the nineteenth century. It’s just a brilliant book. I couldn’t put it down. Ten people told me I had to read it, and I kept shrugging my shoulders and that’s when I started, and I read it front to back in one long day. It is — if you want to understand why there are a billion or two billion people out there for whom capitalism looks not like a powerful mechanism of production but like an extremely coercive system. The White Tiger is a great way to do that. Chris Buckley’s, Thank You For Smoking, is optional.We will also use the case method and the case method occupies about a third of the course. We will use — the ones in white are straightforward cases, the ones in gold we’ll have the people in the room or some of the people. Polaroid is the story of the land camera and a brilliant technology which ultimately crashed and burned, and it’s — the case is a hard business school case about the attempt to get that business through its crisis at the time that it went broke. Goldman Sachs IPO terrifically — it’s a good HBS case, and better yet we’ll have Paolo Zannoni with us to tell the story from the inside of the Goldman system. Wanda Rapaczynski is the story of getting a business going in Poland just after the death of communism. A Yale-trained business woman who created something called Agora S.A., which is the largest publishing company in East Europe, and how she coped with the toxic environment, the toxic business environment, left over by communism.Selco India is a microfinance story. Cardiothoracic Systems is a tech story and I’m going to have the Dean of SOM come and do it as a business case with you, which means you’re going to need to wear helmets. She is an aggressive cold caller. By the way, I’m going to make two kinds of calls in this course, cold calls are the kind of thing I did today where you get no warning, and warm calls I’ll send you an email and say heads up about, and in the second case you’ve really got to have something to say. Some of the fun in this stuff is the back and forth between you and me, and you and you. The Enron case, Jim Alexander is an important guy in this course. Jim would you just stand up and wave? Jim was — Jim is a good friend of mine who had a career in investment banking and then at Enron, and he was Chief Financial Officer of Enron, Global Pipeline &amp; Power, and he saw what was happening and got out. He is referred to as the fly in the ointment in Smartest Guys in the Room, which is the popularized story of Enron’s crash. He then went on and co-founded Spinnaker Exploration whose operating principle was: think what Enron would do and do the opposite. Spinnaker became a public company and was extremely successful.Medley Global Advisors, this is a case about gathering business intelligence and selling it at high prices. Medley is another Yale-trained person. He founded the company and the case is about his attempt to sell the company, which he did, so he’s selling a company that — which is posthumously his, and he actually sold it for fifty seven million bucks, and it’s a no venture medley story and he’s a very interesting guy. Then maybe we’ll talk about Mory’s. I’m chair of a workout committee which is trying to put more effective business and it turns out to be a really interesting hard case. Jim Alexander, Paolo Zannoni, Richard Medley will be practitioner guests. The teaching assistants Leslie Hough, Nancy Hite, Morgan Ramsey, Ramsey-Elliot, and Erlend and me. That’s what the course requires. The course requirements are these, three short memos, one of them can be up to 800 words, and the other two could be up to 1,000 words. Three short memos, a midterm, and a final, and that’s that. I’ll take questions afterward.Professor Steven Smith: Let me start today by asking the question, “what is political philosophy?” Custom dictates that I say something about the subject matter of this course at its outset. This in some ways might seem a case of putting the cart before the horse, or the cart before the course maybe, because how can you say, how can we say what political philosophy is in advance of doing it? Anyway, let me try to say something that might be useful.In one sense, you could say political philosophy is simply a branch or what we call a subfield of the field of political science. Yes, all right. It exists alongside of other areas of political inquiry like American government, comparative politics, and international relations. Yet in another sense, political philosophy is something much different than simply a subfield; it seems to be the oldest and most fundamental part of political science. Its purpose is to lay bare, as it were, the fundamental problems, the fundamental concepts and categories which frame the study of politics. In this respect it seems to me much less like just a branch of political science than the foundation of the entire discipline.The study of political philosophy often begins as this course will do also, with the study of the great books or some of the great books of our field. Political philosophy is the oldest of the social sciences, and it can boast a wealth of heavy hitters from Plato and Aristotle to Machiavelli, Hobbes, Hegel, Tocqueville, Nietzsche, and so on. You might say that the best way to learn what political philosophy is, is simply to study and read the works of those who have shaped the field–yes, right? But to do that is, I recognize, not without dangers, often severe dangers of its own. Why study just these thinkers and not others? Is not any so-called list of great thinkers or great texts likely to be simply arbitrary and tell us more about what such a list excludes than what it includes? Furthermore, it would seem that the study of the great books or great thinkers of the past can easily degenerate into a kind of antiquarianism, into a sort of pedantry. We find ourselves easily intimidated by a list of famous names and end up not thinking for ourselves. Furthermore, doesn’t the study of old books, often very old books, risk overlooking the issues facing us today? What can Aristotle or Hobbes tells us about the world of globalization, of terrorism, of ethnic conflict and the like? Doesn’t political science make any progress? After all, economists no longer read Adam Smith. I hesitate to… I don’t hesitate to say that you will never read Adam Smith in an economics course here at Yale, and it is very unlikely that you will read Freud in your psychology classes. So why then does political science, apparently uniquely among the social sciences, continue to study Aristotle, Locke and other old books?These are all real questions, and I raise them now myself because they are questions I want you to be thinking about as you do your reading and work through this course. I want you to remain alive to them throughout the semester. Yes? Okay. One reason I want to suggest that we continue to read these books is not because political science makes no progress, or that we are somehow uniquely fixated on an ancient past, but because these works provide us with the most basic questions that continue to guide our field. We continue to ask the same questions that were asked by Plato, Machiavelli, Hobbes, and others. We may not accept their answers and it’s very likely that we do not, but their questions are often put with a kind of unrivaled clarity and insight. The fact is that there are still people in the world, many people, who regard themselves as Aristotelians, Thomists, Lockeans, Kantians, even the occasional Marxist can still be found in Ivy League universities. These doctrines have not simply been refuted, or replaced, or historically superceded; they remain in many ways constitutive of our most basis outlooks and attitudes. They are very much alive with us today, right. So political philosophy is not just some kind of strange historical appendage attached to the trunk of political science; it is constitutive of its deepest problems.If you doubt the importance of the study of political ideas for politics, consider the works of a famous economist, John Maynard Keynes, everyone’s heard of him. Keynes wrote in 1935. “The ideas of economists and political philosophers, both when they are right and when they are wrong, are more powerful than is commonly understood….Practical men,” Keynes continues, practical men “who believe themselves to be quite exempt from any intellectual influences, are usually the slave of some defunct economist. Madmen in authority, who hear voices in the air, are distilling their frenzy from some academic scribbler of a few years back” . So this course will be devoted to the study of those “academic scribblers” who have written books that continue to impress and create the forms of authority with which we are familiar. But one thing we should not do, right, one thing we should not do is to approach these works as if they provide, somehow, answers, ready-made answers to the problems of today. Only we can provide answers to our problems. Rather, the great works provide us, so to speak, with a repository of fundamental or permanent questions that political scientists still continue to rely on in their work. The great thinkers are great not because they’ve created some set of museum pieces that can be catalogued, admired, and then safely ignored like a kind of antiquities gallery in the Metropolitan Museum of Art; but rather because they have defined the problems that all later thinkers and scholars have had to use in order to make sense of their world at all. Again, we still think in terms of the basic concepts and categories that were created for us long ago. Okay?So one thing you will quickly note is that there are no permanent answers in a study of political philosophy. A famous mathematician once said, “Every question must have a correct answer, for every question one answer.” That itself is an eminently contestable proposition. Among the great thinkers there is profound disagreement over the answers to even the most fundamental questions concerning justice, concerning rights, concerning liberty. In political philosophy, it is never a sufficient answer to answer a question with a statement “because Plato says so,” or “because Nietzsche says so.” There are no final authorities in that respect in philosophy because even the greatest thinkers disagree profoundly with one another over their answers, and it is precisely this disagreement with one another that makes it possible for us, the readers today, to enter into their conversation. We are called upon first to read and listen, and then to judge “who’s right?”  “how do we know?” The only way to decide is not to defer to authority, whoever’s authority, but to rely on our own powers of reason and judgment, in other words the freedom of the human mind to determine for us what seems right or best. Okay?But what are these problems that I’m referring to? What are these problems that constitute the subject matter of the study of politics? What are the questions that political scientists try to answer? Such a list may be long, but not infinitely so. Among the oldest and still most fundamental questions are: what is justice? What are the goals of a decent society? How should a citizen be educated? Why should I obey the law, and what are the limits, if any, to my obligation? What constitutes the ground of human dignity? Is it freedom? Is it virtue? Is it love, is it friendship? And of course, the all important question, even though political philosophers and political scientists rarely pronounce it, namely, quid sit deus, what is God? Does he exist? And what does that imply for our obligations as human beings and citizens? Those are some of the most basic and fundamental problems of the study of politics, but you might say, where does one enter this debate? Which questions and which thinkers should one pick up for oneself?Perhaps the oldest and most fundamental question that I wish to examine in the course of this semester is the question: what is a regime? What are regimes? What are regime politics? The term “regime” is a familiar one. We often hear today about shaping regimes or about changing regimes, but what is a regime? How many kinds are there? How are they defined? What holds them together, and what causes them to fall apart? Is there a single best regime? Those are the questions I want us to consider. The concept of the regime is perhaps the oldest and most fundamental of political ideas. It goes back to Plato and even before him. In fact, the title of the book that you will be reading part of for this semester, Plato’s Republic, is actually a translation of the Greek word politea that means constitution or regime. The Republic is a book about the regime and all later political philosophy is a series of footnotes to Plato, and that means that it must provide a series of variations, so to speak, on Plato’s conception of the best regime. But what is a regime? Broadly speaking, a regime indicates a form of government, whether it is ruled by the one, a few, the many, or as more common, some mixture, a combination of these three ruling powers. The regime is defined in the first instance by how people are governed and how public offices are distributed by election, by birth, by lot, by outstanding personal qualities and achievements, and what constitutes a people’s rights and responsibilities. The regime again refers above all to a form of government. The political world does not present itself as simply an infinite variety of different shapes. It is structured and ordered into a few basic regime types. In this, I take it to be one of the most important propositions and insights of political science. Right? So far?But there is a corollary to this insight. The regime is always something particular. It stands in a relation of opposition to other regime types, and as a consequence the possibility of conflict, of tension, and war is built in to the very structure of politics. Regimes are necessarily partisan, that is to say they instill certain loyalties and passions in the same way that one may feel partisanship to the New York Yankees or the Boston Red Sox, or to Yale over all rival colleges and institutions, right? Fierce loyalty, partisanship: it is inseparable from the character of regime politics. These passionate attachments are not merely something that take place, you might, say between different regimes, but even within them, as different parties and groups with loyalties and attachments contend for power, for honor, and for interest. Henry Adams once cynically reflected that politics is simply the “organization of hatreds,” and there is more than a grain of truth to this, right, although he did not say that it was also an attempt to channel and redirect those hatreds and animosities towards something like a common good. This raises the question whether it is possible to transform politics, to replace enmity and factional conflict with friendship, to replace conflict with harmony? Today it is the hope of many people, both here and abroad, that we might even overcome, might even transcend the basic structure of regime politics altogether and organize our world around global norms of justice and international law. Is such a thing possible? It can’t be ruled out, but such a world, I would note–let’s just say a world administered by international courts of law, by judges and judicial tribunals–would no longer be a political world. Politics only takes place within the context of the particular. It is only possible within the structure of the regime itself.But a regime is more than simply a set of formal structures and institutions, okay? It consists of the entire way of life, the moral and religious practices, the habits, customs, and sentiments that make a people what they are. The regime constitutes an ethos, that is to say a distinctive character, that nurtures distinctive human types. Every regime shapes a common character, a common character type with distinctive traits and qualities. So the study of regime politics is in part a study of the distinctive national character types that constitutes a citizen body. To take an example of what I mean, when Tocqueville studied the American regime or the democratic regime, properly speaking, in Democracy in America, he started first with our formal political institutions as enumerated in the Constitution, such things as the separation of powers, the division between state and federal government and so on, but then went on to look at such informal practices as American manners and morals, our tendency to form small civic associations, our peculiar moralism and religious life, our defensiveness about democracy and so on. All of these intellectual and moral customs and habits helped to constitute the democratic regime. And this regime–in this sense the regime describes the character or tone of a society. What a society finds most praiseworthy, what it looks up to, okay? You can’t understand a regime unless you understand, so to speak, what it stands for, what a people stand for, what they look up to as well as its, again, its structure of institutions and rights and privileges.This raises a further set of questions that we will consider over the term. How are regimes founded, the founding of regimes? What brings them into being and sustains them over time? For thinkers like Tocqueville, for example, regimes are embedded in the deep structures of human history that have determined over long centuries the shape of our political institutions and the way we think about them. Yet other voices within the tradition–Plato, Machiavelli, Rousseau come to mind–believed that regimes can be self-consciously founded through deliberate acts of great statesmen or founding fathers as we might call them. These statesmen–Machiavelli for example refers to Romulus, Moses, Cyrus, as the founders that he looks to; we might think of men like Washington, Jefferson, Adams and the like–are shapers of peoples and institutions. The very first of the Federalist Papers by Alexander Hamilton even begins by posing this question in the starkest terms. “It has been frequently remarked,” Hamilton writes, “that it seems to have been reserved to the people of this country, by their conduct and example, to decide the important question, whether societies of men are really capable or not of establishing good government from reflection and choice, or whether they are forever destined to depend for their political constitutions on accident and force.” There we see Hamilton asking the basic question about the founding of political institutions: are they created, as he puts it, by “reflection and choice,” that is to say by a deliberate act of statecraft and conscious human intelligence, or are regimes always the product of accident, circumstance, custom, and history?But the idea that regimes may be created or founded by a set of deliberate acts raises a further question that we will study, and is inseparable from the study of regimes. N’est pas? Who is a statesman? What is a statesman? Again, one of the oldest questions of political science, very rarely asked by the political science of today that is very skeptical of the language of statesmanship. In its oldest sense, political science simply was a science of statecraft. It was addressed to statesman or potential statesmen charged with steering the ship of state. What are the qualities necessary for sound statesmanship? How does statecraft differ from other kinds of activities? Must a good statesman, as Plato believed for example, be a philosopher versed in poetry, mathematics, and metaphysics? Or is statesmanship, as Aristotle believed, a purely practical skill requiring judgment based on deliberation and experience? Is a streak of cruelty and a willingness to act immorally necessary for statecraft, as Machiavelli infamously argued? Must the statesman be capable of literally transforming human nature, as Rousseau maintains, or is the sovereign a more or less faceless bureaucrat in manner of a modern CEO, as, for example, someone like Hobbes seems to have believed? All of our texts that we will read–theRepublic, the Politics, the Prince, the Social Contract–have different views on the qualities of statecraft and what are those qualities necessary to found and maintain states that we will be considering.All of this, in a way, is another way of saying, or at least implying, okay, that political philosophy is an imminentlypractical discipline, a practical field. Its purpose is not simply contemplation, its purpose is not reflection alone: it is advice giving. None of the people we will study this semester were cloistered scholars detached from the world, although this is a very common prejudice against political philosophy, that it is somehow uniquely sort of “pie in the sky” and detached from the world. But the great thinkers were very far from being just, so to speak, detached intellectuals. Plato undertook three long and dangerous voyages to Sicily in order to advise the King Dionysius. Aristotle famously was a tutor of Alexander the Great. Machiavelli spent a large part of his career in the foreign service of his native Florence, and wrote as an advisor to the Medici. Hobbes was the tutor to a royal household who followed the King into exile during the English Civil War. And Locke was associated with the Shaftsbury Circle who also was forced into exile after being accused of plotting against the English King. Rousseau had no official political connections, but he signed his name always Jean Jacques Rousseau, “citizen of Geneva,” and was approached to write constitutions for Poland and for the island of Corsica. And Tocqueville was a member of the French National Assembly whose experience of American democracy deeply affected the way he saw the future of Europe. So the great political thinkers were typically engaged in the politics of their times and help in that way to provide us, okay, with models for how we might think about ours.But this goes in a slightly different direction as well. Not only is this study of the regime, as we’ve seen, as I’ve just tried to indicate, rooted in, in many ways, the practical experience of the thinkers we’ll be looking at; but the study of regime politics either implicitly or explicitly raises a question that goes beyond the boundary of any given society. A regime, as I’ve said, constitutes a people’s way of life, what they believe makes their life worth living, or to put it again slightly differently, what a people stand for. Although we are most familiar with the character of a modern democratic regime such as ours, the study of political philosophy is in many ways a kind of immersion into what we might call today comparative politics; that is to say it opens up to us the variety of regimes, each with its own distinctive set of claims or principles, each vying and potentially in conflict with all the others, okay? Underlying this cacophony of regimes is the question always, which of these regimes is best? What has or ought to have a claim on our loyalty and rational consent?Political philosophy is always guided by the question of the best regime. But what is the best regime? Even to raise such a question seems to pose insuperable obstacles. Isn’t that a completely subjective judgment, what one thinks is the best regime? How could one begin such a study? Is the best regime, as the ancients tended to believe, Plato, Aristotle, and others, is it an aristocratic republic in which only the few best habitually rule; or is the best regime as the moderns believe, a democratic republic where in principle political office is open to all by virtue of their membership in society alone? Will the best regime be a small closed society that through generations has made a supreme sacrifice towards self-perfection? Think of that. Or will the best regime be a large cosmopolitan order embracing all human beings, perhaps even a kind of universal League of Nations consisting of all free and equal men and women?Whatever form the best regime takes, however, it will always favor a certain kind of human being with a certain set of character traits. Is that type the common man, is it found in democracies; those of acquired taste and money, as in aristocracies; the warrior; or even the priest, as in theocracies? No, no question that I can think of can be more fundamental. And this finally raises the question of the relation between the best regime or the good regime, and what we could say are actually existing regimes, regimes that we are all familiar with. What function does the best regime play in political science? How does it guide our actions here and now? This issue received a kind of classic formulation in Aristotle’s distinction of what he called the good human being and the good citizen. For the good citizen–we’ll read this chapter later on in the Politics–for the good citizen you could say patriotism is enough, to uphold and defend the laws of your own country simply because they are your own is both necessary and sufficient. Such a view of citizen virtue runs into the obvious objection that the good citizen of one regime will be at odds with the good citizen of another: a good citizen of contemporary Iran will not be the same as the good citizen of contemporary America.But the good citizen, Aristotle goes on to say, is not the same as the good human being, right? Where the good citizen is relative to the regime, you might say regime-specific, the good human being, so he believes, is good everywhere. The good human being loves what is good simply, not because it is his own, but because it is good. Some sense of this was demonstrated in Abraham Lincoln’s judgment about Henry Clay, an early idol of Lincoln’s. Lincoln wrote of Clay, “He loved his country,” he said, “partly because it was his own country”–partly because it was his own country–;”but mainly because it was a free country.” His point, I think, is that Clay exhibited, at least on Lincoln’s telling, something of the philosopher, what he loved was an idea, the idea of freedom. That idea was not the property of one particular country, but it was constitutive of any good society. The good human being, it would seem, would be a philosopher, or at least would have something philosophical about him or her, and who may only be fully at home in the best regime. But of course the best regime lacks actuality. We all know that. It has never existed. The best regime embodies a supreme paradox, it would seem. It is superior in some ways to all actual regimes, but it has no concrete existence anywhere. This makes it difficult, you could say and this is Aristotle’s point, I think, this makes it difficult for the philosopher to be a good citizen of any actual regime. Philosophy will never feel fully or truly at home in any particular society. The philosopher can never be truly loyal to anyone or anything but what is best. Think of that: it raises a question about issues of love, loyalty, and friendship.This tension, of course, between the best regime and any actual regime is the space that makes political philosophy possible. In the best regime, if we were to inhabit such, political philosophy would be unnecessary or redundant. It would wither away. Political philosophy exists and only exists in that… call it “zone of indeterminacy” between the “is” and the “ought,” between the actual and the ideal. This is why political philosophy is always and necessarily a potentially disturbing undertaking. Those who embark on the quest for knowledge of the best regime may not return the same people that they were before. You may return with very different loyalties and allegiances than you had in the beginning. But there is some compensation for this, I think. The ancients had a beautiful word, or at least the Greeks had a beautiful word, for this quest, for this desire for knowledge of the best regime. They called it eros, or love, right? The quest for knowledge of the best regime must necessarily be accompanied, sustained, and elevated by eros. You may not have realized it when you walked in to this class today, but the study of political philosophy may be the highest tribute we pay to love. Think of that. And while you’re thinking about it you can start reading Plato’s Apology for Socrates which we will discuss for class on Wednesday. Okay? It’s nice to see you back, and have a very good but thoughtful September 11th.