Professor Dale Martin: This is Introduction to New Testament History and Literature. My name is Dale Martin. I’ve been teaching here at Yale for ten years now. I also was a grad student here in the ’80s, in the Religious Studies Department. I then left, taught one year at Rhodes College in Memphis, Tennessee, and then I taught eleven years at Duke and got in love with their basketball team. But then I came to Yale in 1999.This is a course that introduces you to the New Testament literature, but also the history of other material from the very first one hundred years or so of early Christianity. The first question you need to ask yourself is why do you want, or why are you thinking about taking this course? Why do you want to study the New Testament? What is the New Testament and why should you study it? The first obvious answer that a lot of people would give is, “Because I’m a Christian,” or “I believe the New Testament’s scripture and, therefore, I’m here to learn more about this document that is scripture for me in my church.” The problem with that answer is before you say something is scripture, you have to say why is it scripture, for whom is it scripture, and what does that mean? And, in Christianity, when you call the Bible scripture, what that means is that you’re going to listen to it for the Word of God. You’re expecting somehow the Holy Spirit or God to communicate to you and to your church and to your community through this document.But the text of the Bible isn’t scripture in itself, it’s only scripture to a community of people who take it as scripture. The text itself, any text, is not itself holy writing. That’s what scripture means to us. It actually just means “written stuff,” from the Latin. But we take it to mean holy writing, sacred writing. But the writing itself is not holy. It’s only holy to people who take it as holy. Now the problem is we’re at Yale College. This is not a holy place. I know they might have told you that when you came, but you’ve learned differently, haven’t you? This is also not a church. So what does it mean to read the New Testament as scripture is not something we’re going to really pursue in this class, because this is not a religious community. So one of the things that– if you’re here to learn about the New Testament because it’s scripture, the class may disappoint you, from that point of view. Somebody else might say, “Oh I’m here because this is a foundational document for Western civilization and I want to know something about the Bible.”Professor Dale Martin: But what does that mean also, if you say that the Bible is a foundational document for Western civilization? Does that mean you can’t really get along in Western civilization unless you know something about the Bible? And think about that. Isn’t a knowledge of lots of other things much more important for how you get along in Western civilization than knowing the New Testament? For example, it’s much more important to know about cars. It’d be actually much more valuable for you to know how to fix your car than it is to know about the New Testament–right?–if you’re getting along in Western civilization; or how to use computers, or sexual technique, or how to speak other languages. There are all kinds of things that it might be very useful for you to know as an inhabitant of Western civilization; and the New Testament, you might find out, would rank kind of down on the list of those kinds of things.Besides that–okay, let’s take a quiz first. Get out a piece of paper. This is your first exam. This’ll determine your grade for the rest of the semester. Tell me if this is in the New Testament, is in the Bible, or is not in the Bible. All right? It’s just a yes and no question. All you need is ten places to write yes or no. You can even abbreviate and put Y or N. First, which of these things are in the Bible? The Immaculate Conception? Now you may not know anything about the Bible. If you don’t know, just kind of guess, just make a guess. I’m not actually going to grade these. Is the Immaculate Conception something that’s in the Bible? (2) This quotation: “Love bears all things, believes all things, hopes all things, endures all things.” Is that quotation in the Bible? “Love bears all things, believes all things, hopes all things, endures all things.” (3) At Jesus’ birth three wise men or three kings visited the Baby Jesus. Is that in the Bible? (4) This quotation: “From each according to his ability, to each according to his need.” “From each according to his ability, to each according to his need.” (5) The Doctrine of the Trinity; is it in the Bible? (6) This quotation: “You are Peter, and upon this rock I will build my church.” (7) Peter founded the church in Rome. In the Bible, not in the Bible? Peter founded the church in Rome. Make a guess. (8) After his death, Jesus appeared to his disciples in Jerusalem. Is that in the Bible? After his death Jesus appeared to his disciples in Jerusalem. No talking with your neighbor.  (9) After his death, Jesus appeared to his disciples in Galilee. After his death, Jesus appeared to his disciples in Galilee. Tenth and Last: Peter was martyred by being crucified upside down. Oh hard one.Okay, let’s go back. Number One: Is the Immaculate Conception in the Bible? How many people think so, yes? How many people say no, it’s not in the Bible? Somebody tell me what the Immaculate Conception is. Anybody know? Yes?Student: Mary’s conception.Professor Dale Martin: Mary’s conception. It doesn’t refer to the miraculous conception of Jesus. That’s what often people think. See, one of the things about this course is you’ll learn a lot about the Bible and early Christianity, but the most important thing is you learn cocktail party conversation tips.  So think about–you really want to impress that girl you’re with. “Hey, did you know that a lot of people think that the Immaculate Conception refers to the conception of Jesus? It doesn’t!” It refers to the conception of Mary as being without Original Sin. Immaculate means “without stain.” So it refers to the conception of Mary, by her mother, Anna, without–according to tradition–without Original Sin being transferred to Mary; and that’s because, according to Roman Catholic tradition, then she could transmit the birth of Jesus without Original Sin also. Now that’s not actually in the Bible. It’s part of Roman Catholic doctrine. It’s something that Protestants don’t accept. But a lot of people think it’s one in the Bible, or a lot of people confuse it with the Miraculous Conception of Jesus, which is in the Bible, in the Gospel of Luke and the Gospel of Matthew.Second: “Love bears all things, believes all things, hopes all things, endures all things.” How many people say it’s in the Bible? Can anybody tell me where? Come on, there’s got to be some fundies in here.Student: 1 Corinthians 13.Professor Dale Martin: 1 Corinthians 13. Good Sunday School education. (3) Three wise men or kings visited the Baby Jesus. In the Bible? Not in the Bible? How many people say it’s not in the Bible? You say it’s not in the Bible. Why?Student: I guessed. I have no idea.Professor Dale Martin: You have no idea. It’s not in the Bible. It’s true that wise men or kings did visit Jesus in the Gospel of Matthew, but it’s only tradition that says that it’s three of them. Why was the tradition developed that there were three kings that visited the manger of Jesus? Yes?Student: The gifts.Professor Dale Martin: The gifts; there are three gifts: gold, frankincense and myrrh. And so tradition just said, “Well if there are three gifts, there must be three kings.” So that’s why we have that. But it’s not in the Bible. This quotation: “From each according to his ability, to each according to his need.” In the Bible? Raise your hand. Not in the Bible? Raise you hand. Ah, couldn’t trick you. Does anybody know where it is from? Yes?Student: The Communist Manifesto.Professor Dale Martin: Yes, Marx.  It’s from Marx. But a lot of people hear that and they think that’s from the Bible.The Doctrine of the Trinity. In the Bible? Not in the Bible? Okay, why are all you people saying the Doctrine of the Trinity is not in the Bible? That’s usually a real good one. Somebody explain why the Doctrine of the Trinity is not in the Bible. You’re right, it’s not in the Bible.Student: I thought it was thought up by the church to explain the paradox of the Son and the Father.Professor Dale Martin: Exactly. The Doctrine of the Trinity is a doctrine that developed post-New Testament times to explain why Christians were worshipping Jesus and the Holy Spirit also as divine. So the Doctrine of the Trinity developed in the later centuries, after the New Testament. Now some people will say at least the Doctrine of the Trinity is hinted at in the Bible and that the later church was correct to read the New Testament to support it. And that may well be right theologically, but read historically it’s not in the Bible.“You are Peter and upon this rock I will build my church.” How many people say it’s in the Bible? How many people say it’s not in the Bible? It’s in the Bible. It’s in Matthew 16. (7) Peter founded the church in Rome. Is it in the Bible? You all aren’t sure. Is it not in the Bible? Ah, more people say it’s not in the Bible. You’re right, it’s not in the Bible. It’s part of tradition. It’s a very strong part of Christian tradition but it’s not in the Bible.After his death, Jesus appeared to his disciples in Jerusalem. In the Bible? Raise your hand. A few people. Not in the Bible? You’re wrong, it is in the Bible. It’s in the Gospel of Luke and Acts.After his death, Jesus appeared to his disciples in Galilee. Is that in the Bible? Yes, some of you say yes. Not in the Bible? Anybody who’s brave enough to say it’s not in the Bible? It is in the Bible. It’s in the Gospel of Matthew. But now notice, the Gospel of Matthew, as we’ll talk about later, has Jesus appear to his disciples only in Galilee, not in Judea, and the Gospel of Luke and Acts have Jesus appear to his disciples only in Judea but not in Galilee. Ah, that’s an interesting problem we will have to get to at some point.Tenth and last: Peter was martyred by being crucified upside down. In the Bible or not in the Bible? In the Bible? Not in the Bible? The not-in-the-Bibles have it; it’s not in the Bible, but it’s a very important part of Christian tradition.Now I did the little quiz–these are all things that a lot of people out there would say, “Oh yeah, that’s in the Bible, or it sounds like something that should be in the Bible.” Right? Most of them aren’t, or about half of them, I think, are not in the Bible, and yet they’re very important for the history of Western Civilization. They’re important for people’s conceptions. They’re important for the history of art. How many paintings are there of Peter crucified upside down, or depictions in Western Art? So it’s very important for someone to know that there is an important tradition about Peter being crucified upside down, but it’s not a part of the New Testament. It illustrates again this idea that how much of this ancient text is it important for you to know, on its own terms, in its historical context in the first century, or how is it important for you to know in the way it’s been interpreted for the last 2000 years?And what I am telling you is kind of contrary to the way I’m going to teach this course. I’m actually advertising against myself, and there’ll be fewer of you here next time, right? Contrary to the way I’ll teach this course, which is more on the history of the first century of these documents and what they meant in the first century, sometimes the most important thing about the Bible is its impact on the later history. And that’s something that we’ll talk about from time to time in the class, but it’s something you’d get more out of, for example, if you studied an art history class, or if you studied a literature class that talked about some of these issues in later European times.I could illustrate with a lot more other things. For example, if I said, “What do most people believe about what happens to you after you’re dead?” And you’d get lots of different answers. “You’re dead like Rover, you’re dead all over.” Some people say, “You go to heaven.” Some people–there’s all kinds of different things. If I said, “What do you think most Christian religious people believe about what happens to you after you’re dead?” In other words, “Where is Aunt Martha at the funeral?” “Well she’s up with the arms of Jesus. She’s safe in heaven. Her soul is there.” Most people would say that Christians or religious people believe in the immortality of the soul, and that is part of a good bit of Christian doctrine. That again is not something that’s in the Bible, really, so–and it’s not even the best interpretation of official Christian orthodoxy. According to official Christian orthodoxy, the form of your afterlife existence is the resurrection of the body. That’s what the New Testament talks about, either the resurrection of the flesh or the resurrection of the body. That’s contrary to what most people kind of assume is what people believe.The point about this–and where do they get the idea of the immortality of the soul? Much more from Plato. So again it raises the issue, if you want to know most about the most influential aspects for Western civilization, would it be better for you to take an entire semester on Plato than it would on the New Testament? I’m saying it might, actually. The ironic fact is, because the New Testament is considered more important by people, there are a whole lot more people who take my New Testament classes than go over to the Classics Department and take a course in Plato. I’m not sure that’s the way it should be, but that’s the way it is. What this does is it brings up this issue of why are you here, what do you hope to get out of this course? And I want you to understand the method that we’ll pursue in the course.My point is to get you to see that when we study this text in this class, we’re not going to be studying it necessarily as scripture, as the Word of God. We’re not going to be studying it necessarily for how important it was for Medieval and Early Modern Literature, for example. We’re going to look at what it meant in the first century. In fact, what I’m going to try to do is get you to come at the New Testament from the outside. I’ve been teaching this stuff for twenty years, and I tend to find two basic kinds of students who shop my classes for the New Testament Introduction course. One of them are the kinds of students who grew up in a religious household. They went to church. They maybe even have taken a lot of Sunday School, and so they feel like they know these texts from at least a Sunday School or a church kind of point of view. In some ways they kind of feel like, “Okay, I know what the New Testament is, and I already know sort of what I think about it.” There are other people who come to these classes who grew up in a non-religious context; they know nothing about this. They’ve never read the Bible, and they come in and they think, “Well I’m taking it because I don’t know anything about it.” But, oddly enough, because they’ve been raised in our society, they still actually come at this text with some kind of pre-knowledge of the text. They have a conception of what the Bible is. They have a conception of what– who Jesus is, who Paul is. And so they’re coming at the text already with some kind of familiarity with the topic, at least in a popular conception.Now the reason that is true is because we live in a post-Christian culture, and both aspects of that term are important. It’s post-Christian in the sense that it’s hard to live in America without having some kind of exposure to Christianity and without seeing its influence on our society, on our politics, on our culture and our art, and that sort of thing. But it’s also post-Christian because you can no longer assume, in this culture, especially in a multivalent, poly-ethnic situation like Yale, that everybody here is going to be Christian. So we’re in this kind of situation where we have the hangovers of Christianity still occupying the culture, without necessarily knowing a lot about it.So I’m going to ask you to come at the New Testament, though, from the outside. If you feel like you know something about it, put those aside for the moment, because when we do the class we’ll be trying to get you to see this document as if for the first time, to see early Christianity completely as if for the first time.So let’s do a little practice run through this. Come with me now, open up your New Testament as you’re just going to look at it, and we’re going to go through a rushed little survey, through the New Testament. How would it strike you if you knew nothing about it, if you had never heard of it before, if you open up the covers of this book for the first time?At the very beginning is the Gospel of Matthew, and it starts like this: “The book of the origin” (or the genesis is the Greek word) “of Jesus Christ, son of David, son of Abraham. Abraham had a son named Isaac. Isaac had a son named Jacob. Jacob had Judah and his brothers. Judah had Perez and Zerah from Tamar.” And you know how this goes, right? This is the begats, the famous begats, that start the Gospel of Matthew. So-and-so begat, so-and-so begat, so-and so, and it goes on like this for sentences and sentences and sentences. And, as a modern person, you’re going, “What is this? What’s going on with this?” And then you get to the birth narratives in Matthew, the stories of the Baby Jesus. If you lived during the time of Matthew himself, all of this stuff would seem fairly familiar to you, the idea that kings would come from far off and see a star, and that meant that the birth of someone great had been born. This is actually part of propaganda culture of the Ancient World. If you were an ancient person and you picked up the Gospel of Matthew and you heard these stories about these kings from the East, following a star and arriving and finding this baby, that would sound–you know, okay, this is going to be somebody great. This is telling you that this is himself a king or somebody great. So it would sound familiar to you in the ancient world. Then you’d go on and read the rest of the Gospel of Matthew. It’s a story of a man who travels around, giving speeches, sometimes talking to people or teaching. He’s exorcising demons, performs a few miracles, he heals people. And, again, to us in the modern world, if you didn’t already have some exposure to religious narratives like this, that would sound odd. In the ancient world, actually, it would’ve sounded familiar, because there are other stories of other kinds of teachers who’d healed and exorcised demons and performed miracles. That was not an uncommon way to talk about someone who was supposed to be great.But then you get to the next book in the New Testament, the Gospel of Mark. Well, it’s kind of the same story. It’s shorter, there’s less, fewer teachings in it but it’s–so why do you have the second chapter of this book retell the same story that the first chapter of the book told? The Gospel of Luke, same thing. You get to the Gospel of John–John’s kind of different, it sounds different, there’s a different style. But again it’s the same story of this same guy. Why do you have four different chapters of this book, all telling the same story? That’s odd in itself, from our point of view; or it should look odd to us.Then you get to The Acts of the Apostles. Now we’re back on more familiar ground. It starts off like the Gospel of Luke, because it’s written by the same guy who wrote the Gospel of Luke, and in fact it starts off with a paragraph that kind of encapsulates the way– how the Gospel of Luke ended. You know, like TV shows, “Last time on ER.” And this is the way The Acts of Apostles begins. “Last time in Luke it ended this way. Now we’re going to take up our heroes at their next point.” Then it starts sounding like a Greco-Roman novel. And I have to tell you something about novels in the ancient world. There were Greek and Latin novels. Greek novels usually were about a man and a woman, young, rich, who see each other and fall madly in love and passionately want one another. And they might get married, or they might not get married, but they don’t get to consummate their love. Instead, one of them gets kidnapped or has to go off to war or captured by pirates, and she’s taken off by pirates and sold into slavery, and she goes all the way around the Mediterranean, and the young man follows her around the Mediterranean in chapter after chapter after chapter. They always almost connect and almost get to have sex, and then no, they’re–she’s bought by somebody else and taken into another slave job, or he’s captured by pirates. So the whole novel is them chasing each other around the Mediterranean, with shipwrecks and battles and miracles and gods intervening, and all kinds of stuff. And that’s what The Acts of the Apostles kind of looks like. It’s looks like an ancient Greek novel, except it lacks the one thing every good Greek novel had, sex. The Acts of the Apostles doesn’t have sex. You might be disappointed there, but you also have other things that the novels don’t have, such as the Holy Spirit being the main actor for the whole thing. But, notice, that would look kind of familiar to you in the Ancient World. It definitely looks odd to you in the modern world, if you don’t read it as the Bible, and if you just read it as literature. And we also realize that The Acts of the Apostles is mistitled. It’s not the acts of all the apostles, it’s the acts basically of Paul, and Paul’s not considered an apostle by the guy who wrote the Acts of the Apostles. This is another little clue here we’ll from learn this semester. The titles of most of the books in the New Testament were not put there by their authors; they were put there by later Christian scribes. This will be very important.Then you get to The Letters of Paul. And is it strange that most of the New Testament are actually letters?They’re not like modern letters. They’re quite a bit like ancient letters. They’re usually addressed to groups of people, and they deal with sort of philosophical sounding issues, and they give advice on group problems.Then you get to The Epistle to the Hebrews, or, in what a better translation would be, The Letter to the Jews. What’s odd about it is that as you read this Epistle to the Hebrews, you realize two things. Number one, it’s not a letter, it’s actually a sermon. In fact, it doesn’t even claim to be a letter; it looks just like a sermon. And, you realize this is not really addressed to Jews, it seems to be addressed to Gentile Christians to convince them that Jesus provides for them a liturgy that is superior to Judaism. It’s actually neither a letter, nor is it addressed to Jews. This leads to an insight, though, by this time, when you’re surveying your New Testament.These letters seem to be meant to be read out loud. So what–we’ll ask this over and over again in this semester–what would it mean to read this letter out loud in a community, not alone in your dorm room, or just by yourself, in the library?Then you get to 1 Peter. It’s written not to one place, but it’s a circular letter, meant to be circulated around.Then you get to 2 and 3 John, two letters that are written to “the elected lady and her children.” What does that mean?Then finally you get to the Revelation of John, The Apocalypse. The word “revelation” is just the Latinized, English version of the Greek word apocalypse. And apocalypse just means opening up, revelation. This document is really bizarre. It’s not like anything you’ve confronted so far in the New Testament. It starts off with a narrative about a vision. This guy named John says, “I was on the Island of Patmos. I was in–the Lord’s Day. I started having this vision and this angel appeared to me and this all happened.” Then it has several letters, seven different letters, very short letters, addressed to seven different Christian churches. And then it goes into this wild videogame, MTV-style narrative of a heavenly journey of this guy John. He goes up into the heavens. He sees the throne room of God. He sees weird kinds of beasts and animals that had like–they’re bodies of lambs, but they’ve got horns and they’re bleeding all over the place. It’s a story of catastrophes. It’s a story of a cosmic battle between forces of good and forces of evil. It’s like several installments of Star Wars. And finally it ends up with the establishment of a new world and a new City of God.Now that’s a long way–that’s the end of the New Testament–that’s a long way from the little Baby Jesus and the Three Kings in Matthew, isn’t it? But the New Testament includes all that kind of diverse literature; 27 different books, written anywhere from the year 50 to the year 150. So a hundred-year period of time that these books were probably written in. They have different points of view, different situations, different theologies, different genres. They use confusing in-house language. I’ll point out that in-house language throughout the semester, and we’ll talk about how it should be interpreted. And these texts almost defy interpretation by a modern person, unless you have guidance from a historian and expert like moi.Let’s do this little trick again. Instead of looking at the documents from the outside, let’s look at what would an early Christian church look like if you were just to stumble upon them? A little imagination. Let’s pretend that you’re a seamstress. You work in a clothing shop in the City of Corinth, in Greece, in the year 56. A guy next door to you, named Fred, works in a leather factory next door. He has just joined a new club and he’s going to tell you all about it. First, they don’t meet in the daytime; they meet either early before light, at dawn, or after dark, at night. There’s only enough of them to fill a decent sized dining room, but they call themselves the “town meeting.” You’re not sure what they do at these meetings. They don’t appear to worship any god or goddess that you can see. They use the term “god” sometimes, but this god doesn’t have a name, and that’s very bizarre to you. Remember, you’re pretending you’re a Greek person living in the year 56 in Corinth. In fact, these people don’t look like they believe in gods at all, they look like atheists.They have a very high respect for a criminal Jew, who led some kind of guerilla war and was executed long ago, somewhere in Syria. Fred says, though, that this Jew is still alive somewhere. In fact, Fred says that the Jew “bought” him, though you didn’t know that Fred was even ever a slave. In fact, you’re pretty sure the slave wasn’t a slave. So what does it mean that this guy bough him? At these town meetings they eat meals–which is not unusual since most clubs in your society eat meals–but they call the meals “the boss’s dinner,” or sometimes “the thank you.” Some people say they eat human flesh at these dinners, but you doubt that because for some reason they seem to be all vegetarians. You kind of doubt whether vegetarians would eat human flesh. Fred says that to initiate new members into their club, they “dip them,” naked, and then they “get healthy.” Once you’re in the club they call you “comrade,” and you have sex with anyone and everyone, because it doesn’t matter anymore whether you’re a man or a woman; in fact, they kind of figure you’re neither or both. That’s this new group.Now I constructed that little picture out of actual data from the New Testament, and what we have from writings about ancient Christians. This was the way at least a good many number of ancient people saw early Christian groups. Every one of the little details there I gave–I won’t unpack them all for you now because it would just be boring and we need to move along–but every one of those details comes from some interpretation of a particular Greek term that Christians used. For example, I said this meal they have, it’s called “the boss’s dinner.” We call it the Lord’s Supper. But “the Lord” doesn’t mean “God” necessarily, it means your boss. So the Lord’s Supper, put back into normal Greek language, would be something like “the boss’s dinner.” Or, as I said, they call it, “the thank you.” Episcopalians call the Communion, when they take it on Sunday, “the Eucharist,” which is just from the Greek word meaning “thanks.” So all of these different things– the part about it, it doesn’t matter whether you’re a man and woman, Christians went around saying things like, “In Christ there is no male and female.” What, no male and female? And some outsiders did interpret that as meaning that these Christians seem to kind of have sex with each other. They call each other “brother” and “sister” and yet they’re always talking about love all the time. They have meetings at night, in the dark. Yeah, so there were all these rumors about early Christian groups like this.So a lot of these things–I said they call you “comrade.” Well Christians called each other “brother” and “sister.” But that wouldn’t have been sort of a normal, everyday way to talk about a stranger in the ancient world. It would sound somewhat odd, like in our thinking it would be somewhat odd, or Communist or something, to call somebody “comrade.” So the language that different early Christians used about each other, and for themselves, was sometimes very common Greek language, but sometimes it would’ve also sounded strange and kind of in-house to other people. In other words, the Bible presents us with a very strange world, if we approach it without our normal preconceptions, if we approach it fresh and from the outside. This is an ancient collection of documents. It wasn’t all put together right when they were written.Next time I’m going to actually talk about how did these 27 different diverse documents come to be included in the New Testament? That’s the whole history of the canon, and I’ll talk about that in my next lecture. In fact, a good bit of the history of early Christianity, and the New Testament itself, was to take what was a diverse group of different people, all somehow being loyal to this guy they called Jesus. But they weren’t all the same, and they were in different geographical situations, they had different beliefs. And early Christianity was an attempt to pull all these things into one unified movement, in some way, to get some kind of uniformity of belief and practice.So this course is actually going to run counter to that historical tendency to make unity out of diversity. What we’re going to do is we’re going to take the New Testament, and we’re going to take the different writings, and we’re going to take them apart. And one of the major themes of the course will be the diversity of Early Christianity; in fact, the diversity of Early Christianities, is one of the ways I put it on the syllabus. We will look at all the different ways Jesus was thought of to be either divine or human or some combination of both. We’ll look at different ways that early Christians dealt with the fact that this movement seemed to come out of Judaism. Well, does that mean we’re Jews? If not, what does it mean we are? We’ll look at all the different diversities. How they treated women, different ways that women could take a place in this movement. Or different ways that they treated slaves and other servants in their households. How did they react to the politics? How did they react to the powerful Roman Empire? We’ll take all these different topics, at different points in the course, and we’ll talk about the diverse ways that early Christians reacted to these social and cultural issues, and we’ll read the New Testament in light of that. So what’s going on is taking what is a unity, and pulling apart that unity to see the diversity of this early Christian movement and these documents.Now I’m going to pause for a minute and let you ask questions, or make comments, or throw things, or whatever. Don’t be shy. Yes?Student: Are you going to talk at all about sort of how the decisions were made to what documents to include or what documents to exclude?Professor Dale Martin: Yes. He asked if I was going to talk about how decisions were made about what to include in the New Testament and what not to include in the New Testament. And I’ll talk about that actually the next lecture, when I talk about the history of the canon. Why were some books–there were a lot more early Christian pieces of literature that we know of. Some we’re discovering all the time. The Gospel of Judas. You may have read in the newspapers and magazines that a new Gospel of Judas has just been published, that some people at Yale actually knew twenty years ago existed because it was shown to some people here. But most people didn’t know about it. And it’s just been published in an English translation. Why did the Gospel of Judas not make it into the canon? We’ll talk about those issues next time. Yes sir?Student: Are we going to go over the different translations?Professor Dale Martin: Are we going to go over the different translations, and which one is best? We will raise the issue of translation periodically. For example, when I talk about the syllabus in just a moment, I’m going to talk about what Bible you should bring to class, and I recommend–I did recommend one particular study bible to the bookstore to buy, but I’m sort of hoping that not everybody will bring that same translation of the New Testament, because sometimes I’ll say, “Well this translation says this in the English. Does anyone have a different translation?” And at particular points, when there is something important about the different translations, I’ll bring that up, and I’ll explain every once in awhile. That won’t be sort of a major lecture in its own right. It’s something that will come up over and over again. How does translation happen? How do debates about translation get resolved? Yes?Student: Are you going to talk about the Old Testament at all, either sort of how .Professor Dale Martin: Am I going to talk about the Old Testament at all? I will when it’s relevant. So, for example, next time I will also talk a bit about the canon of the Old Testament, and how there are different decisions about that from the New Testament. I’ll talk about why the Jewish Bible is different from the Roman Catholic Bible, even with regard to what they consider the Old Testament. When we talk about apocalypticism, and the Gospel of Mark and Judaism, I’m actually going to–you have to read at least the last half of the Book of Daniel, from the Old Testament. And the reason is because Daniel is an older apocalyptic, prophetic text that was heavily influenced on early Christian literature. And I will give a lecture in about two more times on the history of Judaism in this Second Temple Period; that is, what did Judaism look like at the time of Jesus and Paul? And that will necessitate referring to the Hebrew Bible some. So I will every once in awhile.But I’m not going to–I will, for example, talk about why did the Gospel of Matthew take this particular Hebrew Bible text to be a prophesy about Jesus? And we’ll look back maybe and see how that difficult text would’ve looked in its original context. But– so when it’s relevant, I will refer back to the Hebrew Bible or the Old Testament. And for those of you who are not aware, what Christians call the Old Testament is simply what Jews call the Hebrew Bible. It basically refers to the same document. We just use different terms, because for the Jews, of course, Hebrew scripture is not old, in the sense of passé. Any other questions? Yes.Student: Will we be talking somewhat about the legacy of the Bible on later literature or in the context?Professor Dale Martin: Will we be talking about the legacies of the Bible in later literature? Not as much as I should. And that’s why at the very beginning of this lecture–you may have come in a little bit late–I said this course will concentrate on the meaning of these texts in their early historical context. Every once in a while we’ll bring up an issue of well, how has this been interpreted over the centuries? The one time we will get this very strongly is the one time where you go with your discussion section–I’ll talk about the discussion sections in a moment. You’re expected to all go to the Yale Art Gallery and go through the Art Gallery, with your discussion leader, and then you’ll do a lot of looking at how are biblical themes and issues portrayed in later art? And that may bring up chances to talk about literature also. If you want to bring up those kinds of issues, feel free to. But I’m going to concentrate, in this course, on the meaning of these texts in their earliest context.Anybody else? Questions? Okay, look at your syllabus. If you don’t have a syllabus–are there any extras back there? Okay, well you can find the syllabus–if you want to–there are some more right here, if anybody needs one. If you, or a friend of yours, wants to see this syllabus after the class, and you don’t have one, it’s on the Classes v2 server. So you can go online and get the syllabus, and download it and print it.One of the things I want to emphasize, that I’ve not emphasized already, is attendance here in the lectures is very much required. You will be expected to come to the lectures. Just because this is a large lecture course doesn’t mean you can skip the lectures. Even if you’re doing the readings from the textbook, you’ll get stuff from my lectures that you won’t get elsewhere. So you are required to come to the lectures. The section leaders, once they get to know you, they’ll actually be looking to see whether the people in their section are missing a bunch of lectures; and I’ve asked them to take notes. If you’re missing a lot of lectures, it could affect your grade. So please come to the lectures.There are only three assignments: two six-page papers, that I’ll explain how to do. One is a exegesis paper, and we’ll spend a whole section discussion talking about what we mean by exegesis and teaching you how to do it. Another paper will be a thematic paper on some aspect of conflict among early Christians, such as Judaism and the Law, or women, or politics. And then the final. There will never be a sit-down final in class.Your final exam will be basically one or two questions that I’ll give to you ahead of time. You take it home and you write basically an 8-page, double-spaced paper on the question, not doing research–we don’t want you to run outside and do research. Using the material you’ve learned in class, you’ll be expected to answer some big questions for an 8-page final paper that you’ll turn in at a date to be assigned.Procedures for evaluation are important. To make an A paper in my class, to make an A on a paper, not only does the paper have to have the right answers and fulfill the assignment, it has to be written elegantly and excellently. Every Yale student has access to free writing tutors. I don’t know if you realize how rare that is, in a college. It certainly wasn’t available to me or most people of my generation. But I know you have access to writing tutors. You can make an A in this class by writing your paper as far enough ahead of time that you can take it to a writing tutor and get the writing tutor to help you get the style better, and then turn that version in. That’ll be much more likely to give you an A. If you write a paper that says all the right things, does all the right things, and yet it’s not well written, it gets a B. If it’s a C, that means it’s even worse written, and Ds and Fs mean you didn’t really fulfill the assignment.The texts that I’ve ordered from the bookstore–unfortunately I ordered them late, but the Labyrinth Bookstore will have the textbook by Bart Ehrman, that you can also go online and just order it yourself. The information is here on the syllabus. I’ve ordered the Oxford Annotated Version of the New Revised Standard Version of the Bible. But, like I say, you’re welcome to bring other translation, other versions. When we use the term version, of a Bible, that just means a different translation of the Bible into English. So if you want to use a Revised Standard Version, that is other than the New Revised Standard Version, that’s fine. The New International Bible. There are several other Bible translations that are acceptable. I don’t want you to use the old translations, such as the King James Version, or the Catholic Douay Version. Those have too many inaccuracies because they’re just too old. I also would rather you not use the sort of paraphrases, like the Living Bible. But if you want to use other translations, that’s fine. In fact, sometimes that’ll help us because we’ll compare translations.Don’t worry about discussion sections yet. I’m not sure whether we’ll use the Classes server to have you sign up for discussion sections online, or whether we will do it the old-fashioned way and have you sign up on forms that we’ll give you here in class. But we will organize you into discussion sections. There’ll be a variety of times you can choose. So there’ll be options about when your discussion section will meet. We’ll try to make sure everybody’s schedule is accommodated, and you’ll either meet on Thursdays or Fridays, in discussion sections, and we’ll organize those sections closer to the end of the shopping period, when we have a better idea who will be in here.As I said, the rest of the organization of the class I think is pretty well self-evident. The class is organized first to teach you the methods of the historical critical approach to the New Testament, and help you learn how to do those through exegesis and historical study. And then the second half of the class, we turn our attentions to more of these issues of disagreement and debate within early Christianity, around issues such as Judaism and the Law, women’s positions, politics, and the interpretation of scripture. So that’s basically the semester. Any other questions? Comments? Outbursts? Last chance. All right, if you decide to take the course, I will see you same place, same time, on Wednesday.Professor Christine Hayes: You don’t need me to tell you that human civilization is very, very old. Nevertheless, our knowledge of the earliest stages of human civilization was quite limited for many centuries. That is, until the great archaeological discoveries of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, which unearthed for us the great civilizations of the Ancient Near East, of which I have drawn a remarkably life-like map here on the board:  Mediterranean, I always start with the Mediterranean Ocean, the Nile River, the Tigris and the Euphrates. So: the great civilizations of ancient Egypt, Mesopotamia and the area we refer to as the Fertile Crescent, of which a little part here about the size of Rhode Island is Canaan. And archaeologists in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries were stunned to find the ruins and the records of remarkable peoples and cultures — massive, complex empires in some cases but some of which had completely disappeared from human memory. Their newly uncovered languages had been long forgotten; their rich literary and legal texts were now indecipherable. That soon changed. But because of those discoveries, we are now in a position to appreciate the monumental achievements of these early civilizations, these earliest civilizations.And so many scholars, and many people, have remarked that it’s not a small irony that the Ancient Near Eastern people with one of the, or perhaps the most lasting legacy, was not a people that built and inhabited one of the great centers of Ancient Near Eastern civilization. It can be argued that the Ancient Near Eastern people with the most lasting legacy is a people that had an idea. It was a new idea that broke with the ideas of its neighbors, and those people were the Israelites. And scholars have come to the realization that despite the Bible’s pretensions to the contrary, the Israelites were a small, and I’ve actually overrepresented it here, I’m sure it should be much smaller, a small and relatively insignificant group for much of their history. They did manage to establish a kingdom in the land that was known in antiquity as Canaan around the year 1000. They probably succeeded in subduing some of their neighbors, collecting tribute — there’s some controversy about that — but in about 922  this kingdom divided into two smaller and lesser kingdoms that fell in importance. The northern kingdom, which consisted of ten of the twelve Israelite tribes, and known confusingly as Israel, was destroyed in 722  by the Assyrians. The southern kingdom, which consisted of two of the twelve tribes and known as Judah, managed to survive until the year 586  when the Babylonians came in and conquered and sent the people into exile. The capital, Jerusalem, fell.Conquest and exile were events that normally would spell the end of a particular ethnic national group, particularly in antiquity. Conquered peoples would trade their defeated god for the victorious god of their conquerors and eventually there would be a cultural and religious assimilation, intermarriage. That people would disappear as a distinctive entity, and in effect, that is what happened to the ten tribes of the northern kingdom to a large degree. They were lost to history. This did not happen to those members of the nation of Israel who lived in the southern kingdom, Judah. Despite the demise of their national political base in 586 , the Israelites alone, really, among the many peoples who have figured in Ancient Near Eastern history — the Sumerians, the Akkadians, the Babylonians, the Hittites, the Phoenicians, the Hurrians, the Canaanites — they emerged after the death of their state, producing a community and a culture that can be traced through various twists and turns and vicissitudes of history right down into the modern period. That’s a pretty unique claim. And they carried with them the idea and the traditions that laid the foundation for the major religions of the western world: Judaism, Christianity and Islam.So what is this radical new idea that shaped a culture and enabled its survival into later antiquity and really right into the present day in some form? Well, the conception of the universe that was widespread among ancient peoples is one that you’re probably familiar with. People regarded the various natural forces as imbued with divine power, as in some sense divinities themselves. The earth was a divinity, the sky was a divinity, the water was a divinity, had divine power. In other words, the gods were identical with or imminent in the forces of nature. There were many gods. No one single god was therefore all powerful. There is very, very good evidence to suggest that ancient Israelites by and large shared this world view. They participated at the very earliest stages in the wider religious and cultic culture of the Ancient Near East. However, over the course of time, some ancient Israelites, not all at once and not unanimously, broke with this view and articulated a different view, that there was one divine power, one god. But much more important than number was the fact that this god was outside of and above nature. This god was not identified with nature. He transcended nature, and he wasn’t known through nature or natural phenomena. He was known through history, events and a particular relationship with humankind. And that idea, which seems simple at first and not so very revolutionary — we will see, that’s an idea that affected every aspect of Israelite culture and in ways that will become clear as we move through the course and learn more about biblical religion and biblical views of history, it was an idea that ensured the survival of the ancient Israelites as an entity, as an ethnic religious entity. In various complicated ways, the view of an utterly transcendent god with absolute control over history made it possible for some Israelites to interpret even the most tragic and catastrophic events, such as the destruction of their capital and the exile of their remaining peoples, not as a defeat of Israel’s god or even God’s rejection of them, but as necessary, a necessary part of God’s larger purpose or plan for Israel.These Israelites left for us the record of their religious and cultural revolution in the writings that are known as the Hebrew Bible collectively, and this course is an introduction to the Hebrew Bible as an expression of the religious life and thought of ancient Israel and as a foundational document of western civilization. The course has several goals. First and foremost, we want to familiarize you with the contents of the Hebrew Bible. We’re not going to read every bit of it word for word. We will read certain chunks of it quite carefully and from others we will choose selections, but you will get a very good sense and a good sampling of the contents of the Bible. A second goal is to introduce you to a number of approaches to the study of the Bible, different methodological approaches that have been advanced by modern scholars but some of which are in fact quite old. At times, we will play the historian, at times we will be literary critics. “How does this work as literature?” At times we will be religious and cultural critics. “What is it the Israelites were saying in their day and in their time and against whom and for what?” A third goal of the course is to provide some insight into the history of interpretation. This is a really fun part of the course. The Bible’s radically new conception of the divine, its revolutionary depiction of the human being as a moral agent, its riveting saga of the nation of Israel, their story, has drawn generations of readers to ponder its meaning and message. And as a result, the Bible has become the base of an enormous edifice of interpretation and commentary and debate, both in traditional settings but also in academic, university, secular settings. And from time to time, particularly in section discussion, you will have occasion to consider the ways in which certain biblical passages have been interpreted — sometimes in very contradictory ways — over the centuries. That can be a really fun and exciting part of the course.A fourth goal of the course is to familiarize you with the culture of ancient Israel as represented in the Bible against the backdrop of its Ancient Near Eastern setting, its historical and cultural setting, because the archaeological discoveries that were referred to  in the Ancient Near East, reveal to us the spiritual and cultural heritage of all of the inhabitants of the region, including the Israelites. And one of the major consequences of these finds is the light that they have shed on the background and the origin of the materials in the Bible. So we now see that the traditions in the Bible did not come out of a vacuum. The early chapters of Genesis, Genesis 1 through 11 — they’re known as the “Primeval History,” which is a very unfortunate name, because these chapters really are not best read or understood as history in the conventional sense — but these 11 chapters owe a great deal to Ancient Near Eastern mythology. The creation story in Genesis 1 draws upon the Babylonian epic known as Enuma Elish. We’ll be talking about that text in some depth. The story of the first human pair in the Garden of Eden, which is in Genesis 2 and 3 has clear affinities with the Epic of Gilgamesh, that’s a Babylonian and Assyrian epic in which a hero embarks on this exhausting search for immortality. The story of Noah and the flood, which occurs in Genesis 6 through 9 is simply an Israelite version of an older flood story that we have found copies of: a Mesopotamian story called the Epic of Atrahasis  a flood story that we also have incorporated in the Epic of Gilgamesh. Biblical traditions have roots that stretch deep into earlier times and out into surrounding lands and traditions, and the parallels between the biblical stories and Ancient Near Eastern stories that they parallel has been the subject of intense study.However, it isn’t just the similarity between the biblical materials and the Ancient Near Eastern sources that is important to us. In fact, in some ways it’s the dissimilarity that is remarkably important to us, the biblical transformation of a common Near Eastern heritage in light of its radically new conceptions of God and the world and humankind. We’ll be dealing with this in some depth, but I’ll give you one quick example. We have a Sumerian story about the third millennium BCE, going back 3000 — third millennium, 3000 BCE. It’s the story of Ziusudra, and it’s very similar to the Genesis flood story of Noah. In both of these stories, the Sumerian and the Israelite story, you have a flood that is the result of a deliberate divine decision; one individual is chosen to be rescued; that individual is given very specific instructions on building a boat; he is given instructions about who to bring on board; the flood comes and exterminates all living things; the boat comes to rest on a mountaintop; the hero sends out birds to reconnoiter the land; when he comes out of the ark he offers a sacrifice to the god — the same narrative elements are in these two stories. It’s just wonderful when you read them side by side. So what is of great significance though is not simply that the biblical writer is retelling a story that clearly went around everywhere in ancient Mesopotamia; they were transforming the story so that it became a vehicle for the expression of their own values and their own views. In the Mesopotamian stories, for example, the gods act capriciously, the gods act on a whim. In fact, in one of the stories, the gods say, “Oh, people, they’re so noisy, I can’t sleep, let’s wipe them all out.” That’s the rationale. There’s no moral scruple. They destroy these helpless but stoic humans who are chafing under their tyrannical and unjust and uncaring rule. In the biblical story, when the Israelites told the story, they modified it. It’s God’s uncompromising ethical standards that lead him to bring the flood in an act of divine justice. He’s punishing the evil corruption of human beings that he has so lovingly created and whose degradation he can’t bear to witness. So it’s saying something different. It’s providing a very different message.So when we compare the Bible with the literature of the Ancient Near East, we’ll see not only the incredible cultural and literary heritage that was obviously common to them, but we’ll see the ideological gulf that separated them and we’ll see how biblical writers so beautifully and cleverly manipulated and used these stories, as I said, as a vehicle for the expression of a radically new idea. They drew upon these sources but they blended and shaped them in a particular way. And that brings us to a critical problem facing anyone who seeks to reconstruct ancient Israelite religion or culture on the basis of the biblical materials. That problem is the conflicting perspective between the final editors of the text and some of the older sources that are incorporated into the Bible, some of the older sources that they were obviously drawing on. Those who were responsible for the final editing, the final forms of the texts, had a decidedly monotheistic perspective, ethical monotheistic perspective, and they attempted to impose that perspective on their older source materials; and for the most part they were successful. But at times the result of their effort is a deeply conflicted, deeply ambiguous text. And again, that’s going to be one of the most fun things for you as readers of this text, if you’re alert to it, if you’re ready to listen to the cacophony of voices that are within the text.In many respects, the Bible represents or expresses a basic discontent with the larger cultural milieu in which it was produced, and that’s interesting for us, because a lot of modern people have a tendency to think of the Bible as an emblem of conservatism. Right? We tend to think of this as an old fuddy-duddy document, it’s outdated, has outdated ideas, and I think the challenge of this course is that you read the Bible with fresh eyes so that you can appreciate it for what it was,  in many ways what it continues to be: a revolutionary, cultural critique. We can read the Bible with fresh and appreciative eyes only if we first acknowledge and set aside some of our presuppositions about the Bible. It’s really impossible, in fact, that you not have some opinions about this work, because it’s an intimate part of our culture. So even if you’ve never opened it or read it yourself, I bet you can cite me a line or two — “an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth,” and I bet you don’t really know what it means. “The poor will always be with you”: I’m sure you don’t really know what that means. These are things and phrases that we hear and they create within us a certain impression of the biblical text and how it functions. Verses are quoted, they’re alluded to, whether to be championed and valorized or whether to be lampooned and pilloried. But we can feel that we have a rough idea of the Bible and a rough idea of its outlook when in fact what we really have are popular misconceptions that come from the way in which the Bible has been used or misused. Most of our cherished presuppositions about the Bible are based on astonishing claims that others have made on behalf of the Bible, claims that the Bible has not made on behalf of itself.So before we proceed, I need to ask you to set aside for the purposes of this course, some of the more common myths about the Bible. I have a little list here for you. The first is the idea that the Bible’s a book. It’s not a book. We’ll get rid of that one. The Bible is not a book with all that that implies, that it has a uniform style and a message and a single author, the sorts of things we think of when we think in a conventional sense of the word “book.” It’s a library. It’s an anthology of writings or books written and edited over an extensive period of time by people in very different situations responding to very different issues and stimuli, some political, some historical, some philosophical, some religious, some moral. There are many types or genres of material in the Bible. There’s narrative, wonderful narrative stories. There’s all kinds of law. There are cultic and ritual texts that prescribe how some ceremony is supposed to be performed. There are records of the messages of prophets. There’s lyric poetry, there’s love poetry, there are proverbs, there are psalms of thanksgiving and lament. So, there’s a tremendous variety of material in this library, and it follows from the fact that it’s not a book but an anthology of diverse works, that it’s not an ideological monolith. And this is something a lot of students struggle with. Each book, or strand of tradition within a book, within the biblical collection sounds its own distinctive note in the symphony of reflection that is the Bible. Genesis is concerned to account for the origin of things and wrestles with the existence of evil, the existence of idolatry and suffering in a world that’s created by a good god. The priestly texts in Leviticus and Numbers emphasize the sanctity of all life and the ideal of holiness and ethical and ritual purity. There are odes to human reason and learning and endeavor in the wisdom book of Proverbs. Ecclesiastes reads like an existentialist writing from the twentieth century. It scoffs at the vanity of all things, including wisdom, and espouses a kind of positive existentialism. The Psalms are very individual writings that focus on individual piety and love and worship of God. Job, possibly the greatest book of the Bible, I won’t give away my preferences there, challenges conventional religious piety and arrives at the bittersweet conclusion that there is no justice in this world or any other, but that nonetheless we’re not excused from the thankless and perhaps ultimately meaningless task of righteous living. One of the most wonderful and fortuitous facts of history is that later Jewish communities chose to put all this stuff in this collection we call the Bible. They chose to include all of these dissonant voices together. They didn’t strive to reconcile the conflicts, nor should we. They didn’t, we shouldn’t. Each book, each writer, each voice reflects another thread in the rich tapestry of human experience, human response to life and its puzzles, human reflection on the sublime and the depraved.And that leads me to my second point, which is that biblical narratives are not pious parables about saints. Okay? Not pious tales. They’re psychologically real literature about very real or realistic people and life situations. They’re not stories about pious people whose actions are always exemplary and whose lives should be models for our own, despite what Sunday School curricula will often turn them into. And despite what they would have us believe. There is a genre of literature that details the lives of saints, Hagiography, but that came later and is largely something we find in the Christian era. It’s not found in the Bible. The Bible abounds with human not superhuman beings, and their behavior can be scandalous. It can be violent, it can be rebellious, outrageous, lewd, vicious. But at the same time like real people, they can turn around and act in a way that is loyal and true above and beyond the call of duty. They can change, they can grow. But it’s interesting to me that there are many people who, when they open the Bible for the first time, they close it in shock and disgust. Jacob is a deceiver; Joseph is an arrogant, spoiled brat; Judah reneges on his obligations to his daughter-in-law and goes off and sleeps with a prostitute. Who are these people? Why are they in the Bible? And the shock comes from the expectation that the heroes of the Bible are somehow being held up as perfect people. That’s just not a claim that’s made by the Bible itself. So biblical characters are real people with real, compelling moral conflicts and ambitions and desires, and they can act shortsightedly and selfishly. But they can also, like real people, learn and grow and change; and if we work too hard and too quickly to vindicate biblical characters just because they’re in the Bible, then we miss all the good stuff. We miss all of the moral sophistication, the deep psychological insights that have made these stories of such timeless interest. So read it like you would read any good book with a really good author who knows how to make some really interesting characters.Thirdly, the Bible’s not for children. I have a 12-year-old and an 8-year-old. I won’t let them read it. I won’t let them read it. Those “Bible Stories for Children” books, they scare me. They really scare me. It’s not suitable for children. The subject matter in the Bible is very adult, particularly in the narrative texts. There are episodes of treachery and incest and murder and rape. And the Bible is not for naïve optimists. It’s hard-hitting stuff. And it speaks to those who are courageous enough to acknowledge that life is rife with pain and conflict, just as it’s filled with compassion and joy. It’s not for children in another sense. Like any literary masterpiece, the Bible is characterized by a sophistication of structure and style and an artistry of theme and metaphor, and believe me, that’s lost on adult readers quite often. It makes its readers work. The Bible doesn’t moralize, or rarely, rarely moralizes. It explores moral issues and situations, puts people in moral issues and situations. The conclusions have to be drawn by the reader. There are also all kinds of paradoxes and subtle puns and ironies, and in section where you’ll be doing a lot of your close reading work, those are some of the things that will be drawn to your attention. You’ll really begin to appreciate them in time.The fourth myth we want to get rid of: the Bible is not a book of theology, it’s not a catechism or a book of systematic theology. It’s not a manual of religion, despite the fact that at a much later time, very complex systems of theology are going to be spun from particular interpretations of biblical passages. You know, there’s nothing in the Bible that really corresponds to prevailing modern western notions of religion, what we call religion, and indeed there’s no word for religion in the language of biblical Hebrew. There just isn’t a word “religion.” With the rise of Christianity, western religion came to be defined to a large degree by the confession of, or the intellectual assent to, certain doctrinal points of belief. Religion became defined primarily as a set of beliefs, a catechism of beliefs or truths that required your assent, what I think of as the catechism kind of notion of religion. That’s entirely alien to the world of the Bible. It’s clear that in biblical times and in the Ancient Near East generally, religion wasn’t a set of doctrines that you ascribed to. To become an Israelite, later on a Jew — the word “Jew” isn’t something we can really historically use until about this time , so most of our period we’re going to be talking about the ancient Israelites — to become an Israelite, you simply joined the Israelite community, you lived an Israelite life, you died an Israelite death. You obeyed Israelite law and custom, you revered Israelite lore, you entered into the historical community of Israel by accepting that their fate and yours should be the same. It was sort of a process of naturalization, what we think of today as naturalization. So the Hebrew Bible just isn’t a theological textbook. It contains a lot of narratives and its narrative materials are an account of the odyssey of a people, the nation of Israel. They’re not an account of the divine, which is what theology means, an account of the divine. However, having said this, I should add that although the Bible doesn’t contain formal statements of religious belief or systematic theology, it treats issues, many moral issues and some existential issues that are central to the later discipline of theology, but it treats them very differently. Its treatment of these issues is indirect, it’s implicit. It uses the language of story and song and poetry and paradox and metaphor. It uses a language and a style that’s very far from the language and style of later philosophy and abstract theology.Finally, on our myth count, I would point out — well I don’t really need to cross this out, this is something to discuss — I would point out that the Bible was formulated and assembled and edited and modified and censored and transmitted first orally and then in writing by human beings. The Bible itself doesn’t claim to have been written by God. That belief is a religious doctrine of a much later age. And even then one wonders how literally it was meant — it’s interesting to go back and look at some of the earliest claims about the origin of the biblical text. Similarly, the so-called five books of Moses — Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy, the first five books we call the Pentateuch of Moses — nowhere claim to have been written in their entirety by Moses. That’s not something they say themselves. Some laws in Exodus, you know, the Book of the Covenant, a few things — yes, it says Moses wrote those down, but not the whole five books that tradition later will ascribe to him. The Bible clearly had many contributors over many centuries, and the individual styles and concerns of those writers, their political and religious motivations, betray themselves frequently.I leave aside here the question of divine inspiration, which is an article of faith in many biblical religions. It’s no doubt an article of faith for people in this very room. But there is no basic incompatibility between believing on faith in the divine inspiration of the Bible and acknowledging the role that human beings have played in the actual formulation and editing and transmission and preservation of that same Bible. And since this is a university course and not perhaps a theological course or within a theological setting, it’s really only the latter, the demonstrably human component, that will concern us.It’s very easy for me to assert that our interest in the Hebrew Bible will be centered on the culture and the history and the literature and the religious thought of ancient Israel in all of its diversity rather than questions of faith and theology. But the fact remains that the document is the basis for the religious faith of many millions of people, and some of them are here now. It is inevitable that you will bring what you learn in this course into dialogue with your own personal religious beliefs, and for some of you, I hope all of you, that will be enriching and exciting. For some of you it may be difficult. I know that, and I want you to rest assured that no one in this course wishes to undermine or malign religious faith any more than they wish to promote or proselytize for religious faith. Religious faith simply isn’t the topic of this course. The rich history and literature and religious thought of ancient Israel as preserved for us over millennia in the pages of this remarkable volume, that is our topic, and so our approach is going to be necessarily academic; and especially given the diversity of people in this room, that’s really all that it can be, so that we have a common ground and common goals for our discussions. But it has been my experience that from time to time students will raise a question or ask a question that is prompted by a commitment, a prior commitment to an article of faith. Sometimes they’re not even aware that that’s what they’re doing, and I want you to understand that on those occasions I’ll most likely respond by inviting you to consider the article of faith that lies behind that question and is creating that particular problem for you. I’m not going to be drawn into a philosophical or theological debate over the merits of that belief, but I’ll simply point out how or why that belief might be making it difficult for you to read or accept what the text is actually and not ideally saying, and leave you to think about that. And I see those as wonderful learning opportunities for the class. Those are in no way a problem for me.All right, so let’s give a few sort of necessary facts and figures now about the Bible and then I need to talk a little bit about the organization of the course. So those are the last two things we really need to do. An overview of the structure of the Bible. So you have a couple of handouts that should help you here. So, the Bible is this assemblage of books and writings dating from approximately 1000 BCE — we’re going to hear very diverse opinions about how far back this stuff dates — down to the second century: the last book within the Hebrew Bible was written in the 160s BCE. Some of these books which we think are roughly from a certain date, they will contain narrative snippets or legal materials or oral traditions that may even date back or stretch back further in time, and they were perhaps transmitted orally and then ended up in these written forms. The Bible is written largely in Hebrew, hence the name Hebrew Bible. There are a few passages in Aramaic. So you have a handout that breaks down the three major components. It’s the one that’s written two columns per page. Okay? We’re going to talk in a minute about those three sections, so you want to have that handy.These writings have had a profound and lasting impact on three world religions: Judaism, Christianity and Islam. For the Jewish communities who first compiled these writings in the pre-Christian era, the Bible was perhaps first and foremost a record of God’s eternal covenant with the Jewish people. So Jews refer to the Bible as the Tanakh. It’s the term you see up here. It should be also on that sheet, Tanakh, which is really the letter  “t”, “n” and “kh”, and they’ve put little “a’s” in there to make it easy to pronounce, because kh is hard to pronounce, so Tanach. Okay? And this is an acronym. The T stands for Torah, which is a word that means instruction or teaching. It’s often translated “law”; I think that’s a very poor translation. It means instruction, way, teaching, and that refers to the first five books that you see listed here, Genesis through Deuteronomy. The second division of the Bible is referred to as Nevi’im, which is the Hebrew word for “prophets.” The section of the Prophets is divided really into two parts, because there are two types of writing in the prophetic section of the Bible. The first or former Prophets continues the kind of narrative prose account of the history of Israel, focusing on the activities of Israel’s prophets. All right? So, the Former Prophets are narrative texts. The Latter Prophets are poetic and oracular writings that bear the name of the prophet to whom the writings are ascribed. You have the three major prophets, Isaiah, Jeremiah and Ezekiel, and then the twelve minor prophets, which in the Hebrew Bible get counted together as one book, because those twelve are very small. The final section of the Bible is referred to asKetuvim in Hebrew, which simply means “Writings,” and that’s probably about 50% of the Hebrew you’re going to get in the whole course, so please don’t be scared. You know, I’ve got two or three other terms that’ll be useful along the way, but there’s really no need to know Hebrew. I just want you to understand why Tanakh is the word that’s used to refer to the Bible. So the Ketuvim, or the Writings, are really a miscellany. They contain works of various types, and the three parts correspond very roughly to the process of canonization or authoritativeness for the community. The Torah probably reached a fixed and authoritative status first, then the books of the Prophets and finally the Writings. And probably by the end of the first century, all of this was organized in some way.If you look at the other handout, you’ll see, however, that any course on the Bible is going to run immediately into the problem of defining the object of study, because different Bibles served different communities over the centuries. One of the earliest translations of the Hebrew Bible was a translation into Greek known as the Septuagint. It was written for the benefit — it was translated for the benefit of Jews who lived in Alexandria — Greek-speaking Jews who lived in Alexandria, Egypt in the Hellenistic period somewhere around the third or second century BCE. The translation has some divergences with the traditional Hebrew text of the Bible as we now have it, including the order of the books, and some of these things are charted for you on the chart that I’ve handed out. The Septuagint’s rationale for ordering the books is temporal. They’ve clustered books Genesis through Esther, which tell of things past; the books of Job through the Song of Songs or the Song of Solomon contain wisdom that applies to the present; and then the prophetic books, Isaiah to Malachi, contain or tell of things future. Some copies of the Septuagint contain some books not included in the Hebrew canon but accepted in the early Christian canon. The Septuagint, the Greek translation, became by and large the Bible of Christianity, or more precisely it became the “Old Testament” of the Hebrew Bible . The church adopted the Hebrew Bible as a precursor to its largely Hellenistic gospels. It was an important association for it, with an old and respected tradition. Our primary concern is the Bible of the ancient Israelite and Jewish community — the 24 books grouped in the Torah, Prophets and Writings on that other sheet — which is common to all Bibles. Whether Jewish or Christian, those 24 are the baseline common books. So those are the 24 that we’re going to focus on.Because the term “Old Testament” is a theologically loaded term, it sort of suggests the doctrine that the New Testament has somehow fulfilled or surpassed or antiquated the Bible of ancient Israel, you’re going to hear me refer to the object of our study as the Hebrew Bible. You may certainly use any other term, and you may certainly use the term Old Testament, as long as it’s clear we’re talking about this set of 24 books and not some of the other things that are in the Old Testament that aren’t in the traditional Hebrew Bible. It means you’re studying less, so that might be a good thing. So, it’s fine with me if you want to use that but I will prefer the more accurate term “Hebrew Bible.” Also while we’re on terminology, you’ll notice that I use BCE to refer to the period before 0 and CE to refer to the period after 0; the Common Era and Before the Common Era, and in a lot of your secondary readings and writings they’ll be using the same thing. It corresponds to what you know as BC, Before Christ, and Anno Domini, AD, the year of our Lord. It’s just a non-Christian-centric way of dating and in a lot of your secondary readings you’ll see it, so you should get used to it: BCE and CE, Before the Common Era and the Common Era.From earliest times, Christians made use of the Bible but almost always in its Greek translation, and the Christian Old Testament contains some material not in the Hebrew Bible, as I’ve mentioned. And some of these works are referred to as the Apocrypha — so  you will have heard that term. These are writings that were composed somewhere around here, sort of 200 BCE to 100 CE. They were widely used by Jews of the period. They simply weren’t considered to be of the same status as the 24 books.  I’m glad they pick up the garbage at 11:10  on Wednesday mornings. But they did become part of the canon of Catholic Christianity and in the sixteenth century, their canonical status was confirmed for the Catholic Church. With the Renaissance and the Reformation, some Christians became interested in Hebrew versions of the Bible. They wanted to look at the Hebrew and not the Greek translation from the Hebrew. Protestants, the Protestant church, denied canonical status to the books of the Apocrypha. They said they were important for pious instruction but excluded them from their canon. There are also some works you may know of, referred to as the Pseudepigrapha — we’ll talk about some of these things in a little more detail later — from roughly the same period;  tend to be a little more apocalyptic in nature, and they were never part of the Jewish or the Catholic canon, but there are some eastern Christian groups that have accepted them in their canon. The point I’m trying to make is that there are very many sacred canons out there that are cherished by very many religious communities, and they’re all designated “Bibles.” So again, we’re focusing on that core set of 24 books that are common to all Bibles everywhere, the 24 books of what would in fact be the Jewish Tanakh.Not only has there been variety regarding the scope of the biblical canon in different communities, but there’s been some fluidity in the actual text itself. We don’t, of course, have any original copies of these materials as they came off the pen of whoever it was who was writing them, and in fact before the middle of the twentieth century, our oldest manuscripts and fragments of manuscripts of the Bible dated to the year 900. That’s an awful long distance from the events they’re talking about. And we’ve got to think about that, right? You’ve got to think about that and what it means and how were they transmitted and preserved without the means of technology, obviously, that we have today; and what was so exciting in the middle of the twentieth century was the discovery of the Dead Sea Scrolls. I’m sure that you’ve heard of them. They brought about a dramatic change in the state of our knowledge of our Hebrew manuscript evidence. The Dead Sea Scrolls were found in caves in the Judean desert. We used to think they were a library of a sectarian community; now I think they think it was a pottery factory or something. So maybe they were just shoved there by people fleeing the Roman conquest in 70 .So that’s up for grabs. But we have this really great collection of scrolls, and among them we have found an almost complete copy of every book of the Bible. Sorry — almost complete copy of the Book of Isaiah and then partial copies or fragments of all of the biblical books, except maybe Esther. Am I wrong about that? I don’t think there’s an Esther from Qumran, I think that’s the only one.  And some of them date back to the fourth and third century . So do you understand now why everybody was so excited? Suddenly, we have evidence, thirteen or fourteen hundred years earlier, that people were reading this stuff and, by and large, it’s a pretty constant textual tradition. Sure there are differences, sure there are differences. We see that our manuscripts are not exactly like those fragments, but there is a remarkable degree, a high degree of correspondence so that we really can speak of a relatively stable textual tradition but still some fluidity. And that’s going to be interesting for us to think about.There are many translations of the Bible, but I would like you to purchase for this course the Jewish Study Bible . So let me turn now to just some of the administrative, organizational details of the course, the secondary readings that we’ll be using. I’m asking you to pick up the Jewish Study Bible not only for the translation of the Tanakh, which is a very good translation, but because it contains wonderful scholarly articles in the back. It used to be we had a course packet for this course that was two volumes, and now with the purchase of this, I’ve been able to really consolidate the readings. They’re really wonderful; great introductions to the individual books of the Bible and so I think you will find that this will become like a Bible to you . So you need to pick that up. It’s at the Yale bookstore. I also would like you to pick up this paperback, it’s not terribly expensive. We’re going to be using it in the first few weeks especially: The Ancient Near East . Other readings, the secondary readings for the course, are all already online . I will be also making them available at Allegra  for people who would like to just purchase them already printed out so you don’t do it yourself, but I know some people really prefer to work online — and certainly for the first week of reading, you can get started because it is online. I don’t think things will be available at Allegra’s until probably tomorrow afternoon.The syllabus. As you can see, it’s a pretty thick syllabus, but it’s divided into a schedule of lectures and then a schedule of readings. All right? So, understand that there are two distinct things there. It’s not just all the scheduled lectures. The last few pages are a schedule of the actual readings, and the assignment that you’ll have for the weekend and for next week’s lectures are the readings by Kaufman. I really, really need you to read that before the next class, and I want you to read it critically. Kaufman’s ideas are important, but they are also overstated, and so they’re going to be interesting for us. We’re going to wrestle with his claims quite a bit during the course of the semester. The secondary readings are heavier at the beginning of the course when we are reading very small segments of biblical text. That will shift. Right? Towards the end of the course you’re going to be reading, you know, a couple of books in the Bible and maybe a ten-page article of secondary reading; so, you know, it’s front loaded with secondary readings. So you’ll want to get started on the Kaufman, because for the first few weeks it’s quite a bit of secondary reading but we’re covering just a few chapters of Bible each time in the first few weeks.Sections: We’re going to be doing this online registration thing that I’ve never done before, so I hope it works. We do have three teaching fellows for this course. I hope that will be sufficient. Actually, if the teaching fellows could stand up so people could at least recognize you, that would be wonderful. Anyone wants to volunteer, we could have a fourth. Okay, so we have two in the back there, we have Tudor Sala raising his hand and Tzvi Novick here. They will be running regular discussion sections and then Kristine Garroway will be running a writing requirement section. I don’t think that was listed in the Blue Book , but it should’ve been listed online that it is possible to fulfill your writing skills requirement through this course. So Kristine will be running that. We will bring on Monday — so please have your schedules as well-formed as they are, on Monday — we will put up times and we will take a straw poll to figure out if we can accommodate everybody within the times.One more extremely important announcement, it’s on your syllabus, but I want to underline it even more than it is already underlined and boldfaced. I want to underline the importance of the section discussions in this course. In fact, it’s really wrong to call them section discussions. It sounds like you’re discussing the lectures and the readings and you’re really not. The section discussions are a complement to the lectures. What I mean is: this is an awfully big thing to spend just one semester studying, and I can’t do it all, and in my lectures I’ll be trying to set broad themes and patterns and describe what’s going on, but I want you to have the experience of actually sitting and reading chunks of text and struggling with that and understanding the history of interpretation of passages and how so many important things have happened historically because of people’s efforts to understand this text. So in sections, a large part of the focus in section will be on specific passages, reading and struggling with the text, the kind of thing I can’t do in lecture. This is important because your final paper assignment will be an exercise in exegesis, an interpretation. The skills that you will need for that paper I am fairly certain are not things that you would’ve acquired in high school and, if we have some upperclassmen — I don’t know, but maybe not even some upperclassmen will have acquired here yet. Exegesis is a very particular kind of skill and the teaching fellows will be introducing you to methods of exegesis. So it’s really a training ground for the final paper, and we have found that people don’t succeed in the course in the final paper without the training they get in section discussion, which is why section participation is worth ten percent of your grade. However, if there are repeated, unexcused absences, there will be an adjustment in the grade calculation, and it will be worth twenty to twenty-five percent of your grade, and it will be a negative grade also. And believe me, this is a favor to you. It is definitely a favor to you. These sections are critically important in this course. Okay? So, if you have any questions, I can hang around for a few minutes, but thank you for coming. We’ll see you Monday.—Notes1. This most recent challenge to the long-standing hypothesis that the settlement at Qumran near the Dead Sea was home to a monastic sect, has been issued by archaeologists Yitzhak Magen and Yuval Peleg. In “Back to Qumran: Ten years of Excavations and Research, 1993-2004,” in The Site of the Dead Sea Scrolls: Archaeological Interpretation and Debate, eds. Katharina Galor, Jean-Baptiste Humbert, and Jurgen Zangenberg (Brill, 2006), Magen and Yuval argue that Qumran was the site of a pottery factory, and that there is no essential connection between the activity of the site and the library of scrolls found in near-by caves. The view has raised interest but has not replaced the prevailing consensus that the scrolls were the library of a monastic sect that lived at Qumran.—References Pritchard, James B. 1965. The Ancient Near East, vol. 1, ed. Princeton: Princeton University Press.Berlin, Adele, Brettler, Marc Zvi, and Fishbane, Michael. 2003. The Jewish Study Bible: Featuring The Jewish Publication Society TANAKH Translation. New York: Oxford University Press.